Source: Unknown
Sent in by: HK, 13 Jul 2017

The ancient Essenes tell us in their texts 2,500 years ago in a very precise language that every human lives on this earth in three worlds at the same time.  We live in the world of thought, the world of feeling, and the world of emotion.  Their texts actually say to us that when these three become one (when the thought, the feeling, and the emotion are merged - married together into a single potent force), then when you say to the mountain, "Move."  The mountain will move.

So, the question is: when we are experiencing judgment and ego, what is that saying to us really?

The first thing it is telling us is that we are not in our heart because the heart has no judgment. And, the heart has no ego.  When we are experiencing those qualities, it is coming from our mind; it's coming from our inner child; it's coming from our fear, from our families, from our perceptions, our conditioning.  It's not coming from our heart.

It is the marriage of the mind and the heart that give us the power to create, and the way they say to transcend, to get through the judgment that we find ourselves in.   It sounds strange at first.  But, what they invite us to do is this: when something hurts us in life, when something crosses our path that causes us pain, our first reaction is to move away from it and say "I don't want that."   That is when the judgment comes in.

If we can embrace the experiences when someone or an experience hurts us in life, not that we like the experience or want to have it again, but the ancients say that we should bless the experience. This sounds very strange - to bless the things that hurt you.  But, here's what happens. When we begin to bless the things that cause us the pain, the blessing is simply the acknowledgement.

For example: "I bless the person who has just been dishonest with me."
  "I bless the person who violated my trust, betrayed my confidence.  And, you say that again and again.  And, you say it out loud.

What begins to happen is that the verbal expression brings the physical energy up from the heart and into the body.  Soon, your body becomes warm and you have tears in your eyes. And you say, "I bless this person. I bless this person."  It is the blessing that relieves the charge of judgment for just a moment.  That's all we need, because for just a moment when the charge is relieved, we can replace the hurt with something else.  And the ancients say that something else is what we call beauty.

So, rather than judging the experiences when they come to us, we can look at each experience as a blessing. And, when we find ourselves hurt say, again, "Yes, I feel hurt."  So, acknowledge it first.

Secondly, what is this hurt saying to me?  What voice am I hearing?  What does it tell me about my life? And, bless the hurt that is giving us information about ourselves.

If we begin that experience, it is much easier then for our thoughts, feelings, and emotions to become one so that can move that mountain when it comes across our path.