Source: Unknown
Sent By: HK, 15 Jul 2017

We have all heard the term, 'raising your vibration' but what does it really mean and *how can it be raised through the Universal Law of Soul Evolution?*

*What does it mean to raise your vibration?*

In the simplest of terms, raising your vibration involves making selfless, positive choices in your life by living through your heart. Everything boils down to energy, including vibration. When your positive energy rises, so does the vibration of every cell in your body.

For example, if you performed a random act of kindness for someone else without truly expecting anything in return, then you've not only affected the life of someone else, but you also unknowingly helped to raise your own vibration.

The premise is similar to being a reiki master. When you perform reiki on someone you are not only helping to heal that particular person, but yourself as well.

Conversely, when you do lower 3rd dimensional things such as watch violent movies or television programs, you are lowering your vibration through fear. This is why those in power use fear as a tool because when we live in fear, we can easily be controlled.

*Why do I need to raise my vibration?*

The choice is yours to make but eventually, whether it is in this incarnation or a subsequent incarnation, we all will learn this lesson as part of our soul evolution.

Before you incarnated here, you were surrounded in unconditional love. This is your true, spiritual reality. When you practice unconditional love, you are bringing yourself more in balance and in harmony with your spiritual reality. While no one is perfect, virtually everyone has performed some sort of disharmonious act in their life, which allows each person an opportunity to learn from these lessons while overcoming all obstacles through unconditional love.

You incarnated here to learn these lessons while fulfilling your soul contract. This may involve various karmic relationships which in turn, will present the opportunity to not only end the wheel of karma, but to raise your vibration as well.

In the end, you want balance and harmony in all areas of your life. The best way to attain this is through raising your vibration.

*What is soul evolution?*

A Rosicrucian belief is that your goal in life is not to be happy. Happiness is an emotion, not a goal. Your goal is to have as many experiences as possible and within those experiences, you will find happiness.

It is within these experiences that you will be presented opportunities for soul evolution. They say that those who don't learn from history are doomed to repeat it. This is also true for the lessons we fail to learn within this 3rd dimensional reality. This is why so many people keep incarnating to Earth again and again, to learn these lessons.

The universe is quite blunt when it comes down to which lessons you need to learn. For example, you may find yourself going from one abusive relationship to another. Unless you end the wheel of karma and learn how to use better judgment in finding a suitable partner, you will continue to experience these lessons within this, and future, lifetimes.

There are at least 12 dimensions of consciousness and within each dimension, there are new challenges for soul evolution. Right now, we are at the bottom of the totem pole and it is easy to be persuaded by lower dimensional forms of entertainment instead of working on our spiritual progression.