This is something we learned in <a href="http://www.chinmayatoronto.org/pdf/slokas/gurustotram.pdf" target="_blank">Chinmaya Vidyalaya</a>

My Salutations to that Guru who revealed to me that Truth, which is
unfragmented, infinite, timeless divinity, and which pervades the entire
universe - movable or unmovable.

My Salutations to that reverential teacher, who opened my eyes, by
applying the divine collyrium of self-knowledge in my eyes, which had got
blinded by the cataract of ignorance.

Guru himself is the creator, sustainer and the destroyer. He is verily
the very transcendental divinity, (the timeless life-principle, which is the
very essence of the creator etc.) My reverential salutations to that glorious
teacher.

My Salutations to that reverential teacher, who revealed to me that
which pervades everything in this world, whether animate-inanimate, or
movable-immovable.

My salutations to that glorious Guru, who revealed to me that selfeffulgent
divinity (the pure unconditioned consciousness) which pervades all
the three worlds, with all its movable and immovable objects.

My Salutations to that reverential teacher, who is like a sun for the
blossoming up of the lotus like mantras of upanishads; and at whose lotus
feet lie the beautiful flowers, symbolizing the best of jewels of vedas.

My Salutations to that reverential teacher, who is verily the eternal
consciousness, which is of the nature of peace. He transcends space (&
time), the concept of zero, the primordial sound and all parts.

My Salutations to that glorious Gurudev, who is established in
Knowledge and Power, who is adorned with the garland-of -Knowledge and
who grants both worldly prosperity and spiritual liberation.

My Salutations to that reverential teacher who by imparting the SelfKnowledge,
has burnt away the very bondage of actions in a whiff, which
had even though taken infinite lives to accumulate.

Even by the very sipping of the charanamruta (the water with which
the feet of guru are washed), we get blessed by the eternal wealth (of
liberating knowledge), and which dries up the endless ocean of seeking &
the subsequent sorrows. My Salutations to the lotus-feet of that glorious
Gurudev.

There is no higher truth than the Guru, no higher penance than
(service to) the Guru, and there is nothing higher than Realisation of the
Knowledge of the truth imparted by the Guru. My salutations to such a
Gurudev, who is himself that very timeless truth (and who has taken up a
form to bless his disciples like us with real knowledge).

My Lord is the Lord of Universe; My teacher is the teacher of the
entire universe; and my Self is the Self of all. My salutations at the lotus-feet
of such a Guru, who has revealed such knowledge to me.

The Guru is the beginning of the Universe, yet he himself is without a
beginning, the Guru is the highest deity, and there is none higher than the
Guru. My reverential salutations at the lotus-feet of such a Gurudev.

O God! You alone are my mother, my father, my brother, and my
friend. You alone are the knowledge, my real wealth. You are everything for
me. You are verily my God alone.
