"Sahaja Yoga is different from other yogas because it begins with Self-Realization" - Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi

Are You A Seeker Of Truth?? Then Sahaja Yoga is the answer. 

Sahaja Yoga is a method of meditation which brings a breakthrough in the evolution of human awareness. It was created by Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi in 1970 and has since spread all around the world.

In Shri Mataji's own words: "Global unity of mankind can be achieved through this awakening that can occur within each human being, so that transformation takes place within us. By this process a  
person becomes moral, united, integrated and balanced. One actually gets the experience of the feeling of the all-pervading divine power as cool breeze. "Know thyself" is the main theme of all the  
scriptures - it becomes evident and one reaches the absolute understanding of oneself.

Thus one becomes peaceful and joyous in life. One becomes collective as a drop falling into the ocean of compassion. This method works for the multitudes and not individually. Of course one cannot  
pay for the experience of Divine Love. Moreover, it is the last breakthrough of our evolution. This is the actualization of such transformation, which is taking place now, worldwide, and has been  
proved and experienced by hundreds of thousands in over 120 countries.

The next step in our collective evolution -

This inner awakening is called by many names: Self Realization, Second Birth, Enlightenment, Liberation, Moksha, Satori and it is the goal of all religions and spiritual traditions of the world.  
This knowledge is ancient, but for a long time it was available only to a few souls, being kept secret and transmitted from guru to disciple, since Self Realization was extremely difficult to  
Achieve. In these modern times, through Sahaja ("spontaneous") Yoga ("union with one's Self"), this experience has become effortless and available to everyone, for the first time in the history of  
human spirituality.

The advent of Sahaja Yoga was prophesized a long time ago in many of the world's spiritual traditions and religions. At the same time, in these modern times many seekers of Truth have been deluded  
into following various false, self-proclaimed "gurus" who are either money or power oriented, but not Spirit oriented.

Through the practice of Sahaja Yoga, our awareness gains a new dimension where absolute truth can be felt tangibly - on our central nervous system. As a result of this happening, our spiritual  
ascent takes place effortlessly and physical, mental and emotional balance are achieved as a byproduct of this growth of our awareness.

We then realize that we are not this body, mind, ego, conditionings, emotions or intellect, but something of an eternal nature which is always residing in our heart in a pure, undisturbed state -  
the Self or Spirit. The Spirit is the source of true knowledge, peace and joy. Self-Realization is the actualization of this connection with our Spirit, which as Shri Mataji advocates, is the  
birthright of every human being.

"It is important for everyone to have that knowledge of the roots within ourselves. Sahaja Yoga allows the individual to become his own Spiritual Guide." 
-- Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi


Curative powers of Sahaja Yoga -

Sahaja Yoga has a beneficial impact on every aspect of a person's life - his mental, physical, material, emotional and spiritual life. A rejuvenated human being finds unknown depths of energy and  
creativity to better his living conditions; and to lead a more meaningful life. The practice of Sahaja Yoga makes a person calm and collected and able to cope more easily and effectively with  
strains and stresses of life. It not only prevents but cures innumerable diseases such as high blood pressure, heart diseases, mental disorders etc.
In Feb., 2016 International Scientists Summit was held in New York on Prevention of SUICIDAL TENDENCIES, a second highest cause of death in the world. Paper presented on Sahaja yoga by a Russian scientist was highly appreciated. The balancing technique of Sahaja yoga makes it possible to keep 
the one practicing away from the tendencies of Suicide, Drugs and ,Pornography   etc. By bringing about an inner transformation of human beings, the benefit of Sahaja Yoga accrues not only to the individual but to the society, to the nation and ultimately to the entire humanity. Sahaja Yoga beings about a true integration of all major religions of the world.

So how is the sacred Kundalini energy awakened?

Inside every human being there is a network of nerves and sensory organs that interprets the outside physical world.

At the same time, within us resides a subtle system of channels (nadis) and centers of energy (chakras) which look after our physical, intellectual, emotional and spiritual being.

Each of the seven chakras has several spiritual qualities. These qualities are intact within us, and even though they might not always be manifest, they can never be destroyed.

When the Kundalini is awakened, these qualities start manifesting spontaneously and express themselves in our life.

Thus, through regular meditation, we become automatically very dynamic, creative, and confident and at the same time very humble, loving and compassionate. It is a process which starts to develop by  
itself when the Kundalini rises and starts to nourish our chakras.

On May 5th 1970, at the sea shore of Nargole, near to Surat, Gujarat, India, Shri Mataji, through her own meditative strivings, inaugurated the technique of awakening the kundalini, thanks to the opening  
of Sahasrara, the last chakra in our subtle system. The Sahasrara is the universal energy centre located at the crown of the head, at the fontanelle, the seventh chakra or highest centre of  
consciousness, known otherwise as the thousand petalled lotus. It is through this last centre that one is able to connect with the all-pervading universal divine "That is”. On the day it was opened on  
a cosmic level it is said that the whole atmosphere was filled with tremendous Chaitanya (divine life force energy - vibrations) and there was tremendous light in the sky, and the whole thing came on  
the Earth.

The awakening of the sacred kundalini energy is within our own hands.Shri Mataji has paved the way. All we have to do is ask, desire, from the deepest chamber of our heart, and it responds. With palms  
outstretched towards a photograph of Shri Mataji,as if to receive a birthday present, one can simply ask the question to your own inner sleeping Mother Kundalini energy:Mother,May I receive my Self  
Realization please? Try it ....It really does happen.

How can we Know Ourselves?

The manifestation of the Kundalini energy is described as feeling vibrations, which is an approximate translation of the Sanskrit term 'Chaitanya’. In Shri Mataji's words, “Chaitanya (vibrations) is  
the integrated force of your physiological, mental, emotional and religious selves. “These vibrations can be felt by the individual practioner, both above the crown of the head and on the palm of the  
hands. This Self-knowledge is not the knowledge through mental faculties, but knowledge which emanates from the source within us all which lies beyond the vagaries of the individual mind, intellect  
and ego, namely the knowledge of the Spirit or Atman. This is the Self Knowledge the Delphic Oracle of Greece indicated to Socrates as being of the highest order with the invocation: Know Thyself.

It is these vibrations which testify for the individual, the inner condition. They empower the aspirant to heal and strengthen, direct and focus the restorative, and redemptive power of the awakened  
Kundalini energy within. These vibrations felt as a draft, wind or cool breeze have been referred to in many ancient texts - 
- In the Judaic (Hebrew) tradition as the Ruach (Ruasch) a feminine noun.
- In the Christian tradition as the Holy Spritus (Holy breath/wind/cool breeze).
- In the Islamic tradition as the Ruh,
- In the Hindu tradition as the Param Chaitanya.

Having successfully received one’s Self Realization, one can quickly master the basic building blocks of this new state of awareness and integrate this marvelous knowledge into one’s life journey.
What's more, having gained simply mastery over one's own vibrations and subtle system one is able to become an ignorance dispeller, a Guru, in passing the experience on to others and helping others  
Achieve Self Realization. In this way, you become your own judge and jury as to whether this phenomenon is real and significant or otherwise.

What's happening is just incredible, beyond all human expectation. What’s in store for us is just phenomenal.



Please visit www.sahajayoga.org to understand more on Self Realization and also to Experience it Now!!!


References: 
www.sahajayoga.org
Medical Science Enlighted -Prof. U.C Rai,MD
The Divine Mother
Russian Sahaja Yogis' Research presented at the International Scientific Summit in New York, USA


