<div class="page"><h3>260</h3>


There ceased the limits of the labouring Power. 

But being and creation cease not there. 

For Thought transcends the circles of mortal mind, 

It is greater than its earthly instrument: 

The godhead crammed into mind's narrow space 

Escapes on every side into some vast 

That is a passage to infinity. 

It moves eternal in the spirit's field, 

A runner towards the far spiritual light, 

A child and servant of the spirit's force. 

But mind too falls back from a nameless peak. 

His being stretched beyond the sight of Thought. 

For the spirit is eternal and unmade 

And not by thinking was its greatness born, 

And not by thinking can its knowledge come. 

It knows itself and in itself it lives, 

It moves where no thought is nor any form. 

Its feet are steadied upon finite things, 

Its wings can dare to cross the Infinite. 

Arriving into his ken a wonder space 

Of great and marvellous meetings called his steps, 

Where Thought leaned on a Vision beyond thought 

And shaped a world from the Unthinkable. 

On peaks imagination cannot tread, 

In the horizons of a tireless sight, 

Under a blue veil of eternity 

The splendours of ideal Mind were seen 

Outstretched across the boundaries of things known. 

Origin of the little that we are, 

Instinct with the endless more that we must be, 

A prop of all that human strength enacts,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>261</h3>


Creator of hopes by earth unrealised, 

It spreads beyond the expanding universe; 

It wings beyond the boundaries of Dream, 

It overtops the ceiling of life's soar. 

Awake in a luminous sphere unbound by Thought, 

Exposed to omniscient immensities, 

It casts on our world its great crowned influences, 

Its speed that outstrips the ambling of the hours, 

Its force that strides invincibly through Time, 

Its mights that bridge the gulf twixt man and God, 

Its lights that combat Ignorance and Death. 

In its vast ambit of ideal Space 

Where beauty and mightiness walk hand in hand, 

The Spirit's truths take form as living Gods 

And each can build a world in its own right. 

In an air which doubt and error cannot mark 

With the stigmata of their deformity, 

In communion with the musing privacy 

Of a truth that sees in an unerring light 

Where the sight falters not nor wanders thought, 

Exempt from our world's exorbitant tax of tears, 

Dreaming its luminous creations gaze 

On the Ideas that people eternity. 

In a sun-blaze of joy and absolute power 

Above the Masters of the Ideal throne 

In sessions of secure felicity, 

In regions of illumined certitude. 

Far are those realms from our labour and yearning and call, 

Perfection's reign and hallowed sanctuary 

Closed to the uncertain thoughts of human mind, 

Remote from the turbid tread of mortal life. 

But since our secret selves are next of kin, 

A breath of unattained divinity 

Visits the imperfect earth on which we toil; 

Across a gleaming ether's golden laugh 

A light falls on our vexed unsatisfied lives,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>262</h3>


A thought comes down from the ideal worlds 

And moves us to new-model even here 

Some image of their greatness and appeal 

And wonder beyond the ken of mortal hope. 

Amid the heavy sameness of the days 

And contradicted by the human law, 

A faith in things that are not and must be 

Lives comrade of this world's delight and pain, 

The child of the secret soul's forbidden desire 

Born of its amour with eternity. 

Our spirits break free from their environment; 

The future brings its face of miracle near, 

Its godhead looks at us with present eyes; 

Acts deemed impossible grow natural; 

We feel the hero's immortality; 

The courage and the strength death cannot touch 

Awake in limbs that are mortal, hearts that fail; 

We move by the rapid impulse of a will 

That scorns the tardy trudge of mortal time. 

These promptings come not from an alien sphere: 

Ourselves are citizens of that mother State, 

Adventurers, we have colonised Matter's night. 

But now our rights are barred, our passports void; 

We live self-exiled from our heavenlier home. 

An errant ray from the immortal Mind 

Accepted the earth's blindness and became 

Our human thought, servant of Ignorance. 

An exile, labourer on this unsure globe 

Captured and driven in Life's nescient grasp, 

Hampered by obscure cell and treacherous nerve, 

It dreams of happier states and nobler powers, 

The natural privilege of unfallen gods, 

Recalling still its old lost sovereignty. 

Amidst earth's mist and fog and mud and stone 

It still remembers its exalted sphere 

And the high city of its splendid birth.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>263</h3>


A memory steals in from lost heavens of Truth, 

A wide release comes near, a Glory calls, 

A might looks out, an estranged felicity. 

In glamorous passages of half-veiled light 

Wandering, a brilliant shadow of itself, 

This quick uncertain leader of blind gods, 

This tender of small lamps, this minister serf 

Hired by a mind and body for earth-use 

Forgets its work mid crude realities; 

It recovers its renounced imperial right, 

It wears once more a purple robe of thought 

And knows itself the Ideal's seer and king, 

Communicant and prophet of the Unborn, 

Heir to delight and immortality. 

All things are real that here are only dreams, 

In our unknown depths sleeps their reserve of truth, 

On our unreached heights they reign and come to us 

In thought and muse trailing their robes of light. 

But our dwarf will and cold pragmatic sense 

Admit not the celestial visitants: 

Awaiting us on the Ideal's peaks 

Or guarded in our secret self unseen 

Yet flashed sometimes across the awakened soul, 

Hide from our lives their greatness, beauty, power. 

Our present feels sometimes their regal touch, 

Our future strives towards their luminous thrones: 

Out of spiritual secrecy they gaze, 

Immortal footfalls in mind's corridors sound: 

Our souls can climb into the shining planes, 

The breadths from which they came can be our home. 

His privilege regained of shadowless sight 

The Thinker entered the immortals' air 

And drank again his pure and mighty source. 

Immutable in rhythmic calm and joy 

He saw, sovereignly free in limitless light, 

The unfallen planes, the thought-created worlds</div>

<div class="page"><h3>264</h3>


Where Knowledge is the leader of the act 

And Matter is of thinking substance made, 

Feeling, a heaven-bird poised on dreaming wings, 

Answers Truth's call as to a parent's voice, 

Form luminous leaps from the all-shaping beam 

And Will is a conscious chariot of the Gods, 

And Life, a splendour stream of musing Force, 

Carries the voices of the mystic Suns. 

A happiness it brings of whispered truth; 

There runs in its flow honeying the bosom of Space 

A laughter from the immortal heart of Bliss, 

And the unfathomed Joy of timelessness, 

The sound of Wisdom's murmur in the Unknown 

And the breath of an unseen Infinity. 

In gleaming clarities of amethyst air 

The chainless and omnipotent Spirit of Mind 

Brooded on the blue lotus of the Idea. 

A gold supernal sun of timeless Truth 

Poured down the mystery of the eternal Ray 

Through a silence quivering with the word of Light 

On an endless ocean of discovery. 

Far-off he saw the joining hemispheres. 

On meditation's mounting edge of trance 

Great stairs of thought climbed up to unborn heights 

Where Time's last ridges touch eternity's skies 

And Nature speaks to the spirit's absolute.

A triple realm of ordered thought came first, 

A small beginning of immense ascent: 

Above were bright ethereal skies of mind, 

A packed and endless soar as if sky pressed sky 

Buttressed against the Void on bastioned light; 

The highest strove to neighbour eternity, 

The largest widened into the infinite. 

But though immortal, mighty and divine, 

The first realms were close and kin to human mind; </div>

<div class="page"><h3>265</h3>


Their deities shape our greater thinking's roads, 

A fragment of their puissance can be ours: 

These breadths were not too broad for our souls to range, 

These heights were not too high for human hope. 

A triple flight led to this triple world. 

Although abrupt for common strengths to tread, 

Its upward slope looks down on our earth-poise: 

On a slant not too precipitously steep 

One could turn back travelling deep descending lines 

To commune with the mortal's universe. 

The mighty wardens of the ascending stair 

Who intercede with the all-creating Word, 

There waited for the pilgrim heaven-bound soul; 

Holding the thousand keys of the Beyond 

They proffered their knowledge to the climbing mind 

And filled the life with Thought's immensities. 

The prophet hierophants of the occult Law, 

The flame-bright hierarchs of the divine Truth, 

Interpreters between man's mind and God's, 

They bring the immortal fire to mortal men. 

Iridescent, bodying the invisible, 

The guardians of the Eternal's bright degrees 

Fronted the Sun in radiant phalanxes. 

Afar they seemed a symbol imagery, 

Illumined originals of the shadowy script 

In which our sight transcribes the ideal Ray, 

Or icons figuring a mystic Truth, 

But, nearer, Gods and living Presences. 

A march of friezes marked the lowest steps; 

Fantastically ornate and richly small, 

They had room for the whole meaning of a world, 

Symbols minute of its perfection's joy, 

Strange beasts that were Nature's forces made alive 

And, wakened to the wonder of his role, 

Man grown an image undefaced of God 

And objects the fine coin of Beauty's reign;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>266</h3>


But wide the terrains were those levels serve. 

In front of the ascending epiphany 

World-Time's enjoyers, favourites of World-Bliss, 

The Masters of things actual, lords of the hours, 

Playmates of youthful Nature and child God, 

Creators of Matter by hid stress of Mind 

Whose subtle thoughts support unconscious Life 

And guide the fantasy of brute events, 

Stood there, a race of young keen-visioned gods, 

King-children born on Wisdom's early plane, 

Taught in her school world-making's mystic play. 

Archmasons of the eternal Thaumaturge, 

Moulders and measurers of fragmented Space, 

They have made their plan of the concealed and known 

A dwelling-house for the invisible king. 

Obeying the Eternal's deep command 

They have built in the material front of things 

This wide world-kindergarten of young souls 

Where the infant spirit learns through mind and sense 

To read the letters of the cosmic script 

And study the body of the cosmic self 

And search for the secret meaning of the whole. 

To all that Spirit conceives they give a mould; 

Persuading Nature into visible moods 

They lend a finite shape to infinite things. 

Each power that leaps from the Unmanifest 

Leaving the largeness of the Eternal's peace 

They seized and held by their precisian eye 

And made a figurante in the cosmic dance. 

Its free caprice they bound by rhythmic laws 

And compelled to accept its posture and its line 

In the wizardry of an ordered universe. 

The All-containing was contained in form, 

Oneness was carved into units measurable, 

The limitless built into a cosmic sum: 

Unending Space was beaten into a curve,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>267</h3>


Indivisible Time into small minutes cut, 

The infinitesimal massed to keep secure 

The mystery of the Formless cast into form. 

Invincibly their craft devised for use 

The magic of sequent number and sign's spell, 

Design's miraculous potency was caught 

Laden with beauty and significance 

And by the determining mandate of their gaze 

Figure and quality equating joined 

In an inextricable identity. 

On each event they stamped its curves of law 

And its trust and charge of burdened circumstance; 

A free and divine incident no more 

At each moment willed or adventure of the soul, 

It lengthened a fate-bound mysterious chain, 

A line foreseen of an immutable plan, 

One step more in Necessity's long march. 

A term was set for every eager Power 

Restraining its will to monopolise the world, 

A groove of bronze prescribed for force and act 

And shown to each moment its appointed place 

Forewilled inalterably in the spiral 

Huge Time-loop fugitive from eternity. 

Inevitable their thoughts like links of Fate 

Imposed on the leap and lightning race of mind 

And on the frail fortuitous flux of life 

And on the liberty of atomic things 

Immutable cause and adamant consequence. 

Idea gave up the plastic infinity 

To which it was born and now traced out instead 

Small separate steps of chain-work in a plot: 

Immortal once, now tied to birth and end, 

Torn from its immediacy of errorless sight, 

Knowledge was rebuilt from cells of inference 

Into a fixed body flasque and perishable; 

Thus bound it grew, but could not last and broke</div>

<div class="page"><h3>268</h3>


And to a new thinking's body left its place. 

A cage for the Infinite's great-eyed seraphim Thoughts 

Was closed with a criss-cross of world-laws for bars 

And hedged into a curt horizon's arc 

The irised vision of the Ineffable. 

A timeless Spirit was made the slave of the hours; 

The Unbound was cast into a prison of birth 

To make a world that Mind could grasp and rule. 

On an earth which looked towards a thousand suns, 

That the created might grow Nature's lord 

And Matter's depths be illumined with a soul 

They tied to date and norm and finite scope 

The million-mysteried movement of the One. 

Above stood ranked a subtle archangel race 

With larger lids and looks that searched the unseen. 

A light of liberating knowledge shone 

Across the gulfs of silence in their eyes; 

They lived in the mind and knew truth from within; 

A sight withdrawn in the concentrated heart 

Could pierce behind the screen of Time's results 

And the rigid cast and shape of visible things. 

All that escaped conception's narrow noose 

Vision descried and gripped; their seeing thoughts 

Filled in the blanks left by the seeking sense. 

High architects of possibility 

And engineers of the impossible, 

Mathematicians of the infinitudes 

And theoricians of unknowable truths, 

They formulate enigma's postulates 

And join the unknown to the apparent worlds. 

Acolytes they wait upon the timeless Power, 

The cycle of her works investigate; 

Passing her fence of wordless privacy 

Their mind could penetrate her occult mind 

And draw the diagram of her secret thoughts; 

They read the codes and ciphers she had sealed,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>269</h3>


Copies they made of all her guarded plans, 

For every turn of her mysterious course 

Assigned a reason and unchanging rule. 

The unseen grew visible to student eyes, 

Explained was the immense Inconscient's scheme, 

Audacious lines were traced upon the Void; 

The Infinite was reduced to square and cube. 

Arranging symbol and significance, 

Tracing the curve of a transcendent Power, 

They framed the cabbala of the cosmic Law, 

The balancing line discovered of Life's technique 

And structured her magic and her mystery. 

Imposing schemes of knowledge on the Vast 

They clamped to syllogisms of finite thought 

The free logic of an infinite Consciousness, 

Grammared the hidden rhythms of Nature's dance, 

Critiqued the plot of the drama of the worlds, 

Made figure and number a key to all that is: 

The psycho-analysis of cosmic Self 

Was traced, its secrets hunted down, and read 

The unknown pathology of the Unique. 

Assessed was the system of the probable, 

The hazard of fleeing possibilities, 

To account for the Actual's unaccountable sum, 

Necessity's logarithmic tables drawn, 

Cast into a scheme the triple act of the One. 

Unveiled, the abrupt invisible multitude 

Of forces whirling from the hands of Chance 

Seemed to obey some vast imperative: 

Their tangled motives worked out unity. 

A wisdom read their mind to themselves unknown, 

Their anarchy rammed into a formula 

And from their giant randomness of Force, 

Following the habit of their million paths, 

Distinguishing each faintest line and stroke 

Of a concealed unalterable design,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>270</h3>


Out of the chaos of the Invisible's moods 

Derived the calculus of Destiny. 

In its bright pride of universal lore 

Mind's knowledge overtopped the Omniscient's power: 

The Eternal's winging eagle puissances 

Surprised in their untracked empyrean 

Stooped from their gyres to obey the beck of Thought: 

Each mysteried God forced to revealing form, 

Assigned his settled moves in Nature's game, 

Zigzagged at the gesture of a chess-player Will 

Across the chequerboard of cosmic Fate. 

In the wide sequence of Necessity's steps 

Predicted, every act and thought of God, 

Its values weighed by the accountant Mind, 

Checked in his mathematised omnipotence, 

Lost its divine aspect of miracle 

And was a figure in a cosmic sum. 

The mighty Mother's whims and lightning moods 

Arisen from her all-wise unruled delight 

In the freedom of her sweet and passionate breast, 

Robbed of their wonder were chained to a cause and aim; 

An idol of bronze replaced her mystic shape 

That captures the movements of the cosmic vasts, 

In the sketch precise of an ideal face 

Forgotten was her eyelashes' dream-print 

Carrying on their curve infinity's dreams, 

Lost the alluring marvel of her eyes; 

The surging wave-throbs of her vast sea-heart 

They bound to a theorem of ordered beats: 

Her deep designs which from herself she had veiled 

Bowed self-revealed in their confessional. 

For the birth and death of the worlds they fixed a date, 

The diameter of infinity was drawn, 

Measured the distant arc of the unseen heights 

And visualised the plumbless viewless depths, 

Till all seemed known that in all time could be.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>271</h3>


All was coerced by number, name and form; 

Nothing was left untold, incalculable. 

Yet was their wisdom circled with a nought: 

Truths they could find and hold but not the one Truth: 

The Highest was to them unknowable. 

By knowing too much they missed the whole to be known: 

The fathomless heart of the world was left unguessed 

And the Transcendent kept its secrecy. 

In a sublimer and more daring soar 

To the wide summit of the triple stairs 

Bare steps climbed up like flaming rocks of gold 

Burning their way to a pure absolute sky. 

August and few the sovereign Kings of Thought 

Have made of Space their wide all-seeing gaze 

Surveying the enormous work of Time: 

A breadth of all-containing Consciousness 

Supported Being in a still embrace. 

Intercessors with a luminous Unseen, 

They capt in the long passage to the world 

The imperatives of the creator Self 

Obeyed by unknowing earth, by conscious heaven; 

Their thoughts are partners in its vast control. 

A great all-ruling Consciousness is there 

And Mind unwitting serves a higher Power; 

It is a channel, not the source of all. 

The cosmos is no accident in Time; 

There is a meaning in each play of Chance, 

There is a freedom in each face of Fate. 

A Wisdom knows and guides the mysteried world; 

A Truth-gaze shapes its beings and events; 

A Word self-born upon creation's heights, 

Voice of the Eternal in the temporal spheres, 

Prophet of the seeings of the Absolute, 

Sows the Idea's significance in Form 

And from that seed the growths of Time arise. 

On peaks beyond our ken the All-Wisdom sits:</div>

<div class="page"><h3>272</h3>


A single and infallible look comes down, 

A silent touch from the supernal's air 

Awakes to ignorant knowledge in its acts 

The secret power in the inconscient depths, 

Compelling the blinded Godhead to emerge, 

Determining Necessity's nude dance 

As she passes through the circuit of the hours 

And vanishes from the chase of finite eyes 

Down circling vistas of aeonic Time. 

The unseizable forces of the cosmic whirl 

Bear in their bacchant limbs the fixity 

Of an original foresight that is Fate. 

Even Nature's ignorance is Truth's instrument; 

Our struggling ego cannot change her course: 

Yet is it a conscious power that moves in us, 

A seed-idea is parent of our acts 

And destiny the unrecognised child of Will. 

Infallibly by Truth's directing gaze 

All creatures here their secret self disclose, 

Forced to become what in themselves they hide. 

For He who Is grows manifest in the years 

And the slow Godhead shut within the cell 

Climbs from the plasm to immortality. 

But hidden, but denied to mortal grasp, 

Mystic, ineffable is the spirit's truth, 

Unspoken, caught only by the spirit's eye. 

When naked of ego and mind it hears the Voice; 

It looks through light to ever greater light 

And sees Eternity ensphering Life. 

This greater Truth is foreign to our thoughts; 

Where a free Wisdom works, they seek for a rule; 

Or we only see a tripping game of Chance 

Or a labour in chains forced by bound Nature's law, 

An absolutism of dumb unthinking Power. 

Audacious in their sense of God-born strength 

These dared to grasp with their thought Truth's absolute;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>273</h3>


By an abstract purity of godless sight, 

By a percept nude, intolerant of forms, 

They brought to Mind what Mind could never reach 

And hoped to conquer Truth's supernal base. 

A stripped imperative of conceptual phrase 

Architectonic and inevitable 

Translated the unthinkable into thought: 

A silver-winged fire of naked subtle sense, 

An ear of mind withdrawn from the outward's rhymes 

Discovered the seed-sounds of the eternal Word, 

The rhythm and music heard that built the worlds, 

And seized in things the bodiless Will to be. 

The Illimitable they measured with number's rods 

And traced the last formula of limited things, 

In transparent systems bodied termless truths, 

The Timeless made accountable to Time 

And valued the incommensurable Supreme. 

To park and hedge the ungrasped infinitudes 

They erected absolute walls of thought and speech 

And made a vacuum to hold the One. 

In their sight they drove towards an empty peak, 

A mighty space of cold and sunlit air. 

To unify their task, excluding life 

Which cannot bear the nakedness of the Vast, 

They made a cipher of a multitude, 

In negation found the meaning of the All 

And in nothingness the absolute positive. 

A single law simplessed the cosmic theme, 

Compressing Nature into a formula; 

Their titan labour made all knowledge one, 

A mental algebra of the Spirit's ways, 

An abstract of the living Divinity. 

Here the mind's wisdom stopped; it felt complete; 

For nothing more was left to think or know: 

In a spiritual zero it sat throned 

And took its vast silence for the Ineffable.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>274</h3>


This was the play of the bright gods of Thought. 

Attracting into time the timeless Light, 

Imprisoning eternity in the hours, 

This they have planned, to snare the feet of Truth 

In an aureate net of concept and of phrase 

And keep her captive for the thinker's joy 

In his little world built of immortal dreams: 

There must she dwell mured in the human mind, 

An empress prisoner in her subject's house, 

Adored and pure and still on his heart's throne, 

His splendid property cherished and apart 

In the wall of silence of his secret muse, 

Immaculate in white virginity, 

The same for ever and for ever one, 

His worshipped changeless Goddess through all time. 

Or else, a faithful consort of his mind 

Assenting to his nature and his will, 

She sanctions and inspires his words and acts 

Prolonging their resonance through the listening years, 

Companion and recorder of his march 

Crossing a brilliant tract of thought and life 

Carved out of the eternity of Time. 

A witness to his high triumphant star, 

Her godhead servitor to a crowned Idea, 

He shall dominate by her a prostrate world; 

A warrant for his deeds and his beliefs, 

She attests his right divine to lead and rule. 

Or as a lover clasps his one beloved, 

Godhead of his life's worship and desire, 

Icon of his heart's sole idolatry, 

She now is his and must live for him alone: 

She has invaded him with her sudden bliss, 

An exhaustless marvel in his happy grasp, 

An allurement, a caught ravishing miracle. 

Her now he claims after long rapt pursuit, 

The one joy of his body and his soul:</div>

<div class="page"><h3>275</h3>


Inescapable is her divine appeal, 

Her immense possession an undying thrill, 

An intoxication and an ecstasy: 

The passion of her self-revealing moods, 

A heavenly glory and variety, 

Makes ever new her body to his eyes, 

Or else repeats the first enchantment's touch, 

The luminous rapture of her mystic breasts 

And beautiful vibrant limbs a living field 

Of throbbing new discovery without end. 

A new beginning flowers in word and laugh, 

A new charm brings back the old extreme delight: 

He is lost in her, she is his heaven here. 

Truth smiled upon the gracious golden game. 

Out of her hushed eternal spaces leaned 

The great and boundless Goddess feigned to yield 

The sunlit sweetness of her secrecies. 

Incarnating her beauty in his clasp 

She gave for a brief kiss her immortal lips 

And drew to her bosom one glorified mortal head: 

She made earth her home, for whom heaven was too small. 

In a human breast her occult presence lived; 

He carved from his own self his figure of her: 

She shaped her body to a mind's embrace. 

Into thought's narrow limits she has come; 

Her greatness she has suffered to be pressed 

Into the little cabin of the Idea, 

The closed room of a lonely thinker's grasp: 

She has lowered her heights to the stature of our souls 

And dazzled our lids with her celestial gaze. 

Thus each is satisfied with his high gain 

And thinks himself beyond mortality blest, 

A king of truth upon his separate throne. 

To her possessor in the field of Time 

A single splendour caught from her glory seems 

The one true light, her beauty's glowing whole.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>276</h3>


But thought nor word can seize eternal Truth: 

The whole world lives in a lonely ray of her sun. 

In our thinking's close and narrow lamp-lit house 

The vanity of our shut mortal mind 

Dreams that the chains of thought have made her ours; 

But only we play with our own brilliant bonds; 

Tying her down, it is ourselves we tie. 

In our hypnosis by one luminous point 

We see not what small figure of her we hold; 

We feel not her inspiring boundlessness, 

We share not her immortal liberty. 

Thus is it even with the seer and sage; 

For still the human limits the divine: 

Out of our thoughts we must leap up to sight, 

Breathe her divine illimitable air, 

Her simple vast supremacy confess, 

Dare to surrender to her absolute. 

Then the Unmanifest reflects his form 

In the still mind as in a living glass; 

The timeless Ray descends into our hearts 

And we are rapt into eternity. 

For Truth is wider, greater than her forms. 

A thousand icons they have made of her 

And find her in the idols they adore; 

But she remains herself and infinite.</div>

