<h2>Book 2 Canto 9 - The Book of the Traveller of the Worlds - The Paradise of the Life-Gods</h2>

<div class="page"><h3>233</h3>


Around him shone a great felicitous Day. 

A lustre of some rapturous Infinite, 

It held in the splendour of its golden laugh 

Regions of the heart's happiness set free, 

Intoxicated with the wine of God, 

Immersed in light, perpetually divine. 

A favourite and intimate of the Gods 

Obeying the divine command to joy, 

It was the sovereign of its own delight 

And master of the kingdoms of its force. 

Assured of the bliss for which all forms were made, 

Unmoved by fear and grief and the shocks of Fate 

And unalarmed by the breath of fleeting Time 

And unbesieged by adverse circumstance, 

It breathed in a sweet secure unguarded ease 

Free from our body's frailty inviting death, 

Far from our danger-zone of stumbling Will. 

It needed not to curb its passionate beats; 

Thrilled by the clasp of the warm satisfied sense 

And the swift wonder-rush and flame and cry 

Of the life-impulses' red magnificent race, 

It lived in a jewel-rhythm of the laughter of God 

And lay on the breast of universal love. 

Immune the unfettered Spirit of Delight 

Pastured his gleaming sun-herds and moon-flocks 

Along the lyric speed of griefless streams 

In fragrance of the unearthly asphodel. 

A silence of felicity wrapped the heavens, 

A careless radiance smiled upon the heights; 

A murmur of inarticulate ravishment 

Trembled in the winds and touched the enchanted soil;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>234</h3>


Incessant in the arms of ecstasy 

Repeating its sweet involuntary note 

A sob of rapture flowed along the hours. 

Advancing under an arch of glory and peace, 

Traveller on plateau and on musing ridge, 

As one who sees in the World-Magician's glass 

A miracled imagery of soul-scapes flee 

He traversed scenes of an immortal joy 

And gazed into abysms of beauty and bliss. 

Around him was a light of conscious suns 

And a brooding gladness of great symbol things; 

To meet him crowded plains of brilliant calm, 

Mountains and violet valleys of the Blest, 

Deep glens of joy and crooning waterfalls 

And woods of quivering purple solitude; 

Below him lay like gleaming jewelled thoughts 

Rapt dreaming cities of Gandharva kings. 

Across the vibrant secrecies of Space 

A dim and happy music sweetly stole, 

Smitten by unseen hands he heard heart-close 

The harps' cry of the heavenly minstrels pass, 

And voices of unearthly melody 

Chanted the glory of eternal love 

In the white-blue-moonbeam air of Paradise. 

A summit and core of all that marvellous world, 

Apart stood high Elysian nameless hills, 

Burning like sunsets in a trance of eve. 

As if to some new unsearched profundity, 

Into a joyful stillness plunged their base; 

Their slopes through a hurry of laughter and voices sank, 

Crossed by a throng of singing rivulets, 

Adoring blue heaven with their happy hymn, 

Down into woods of shadowy secrecy: 

Lifted into wide voiceless mystery 

Their peaks climbed towards a greatness beyond life. 

The shining Edens of the vital gods</div>

<div class="page"><h3>235</h3>


Received him in their deathless harmonies. 

All things were perfect there that flower in Time; 

Beauty was there creation's native mould, 

Peace was a thrilled voluptuous purity. 

There Love fulfilled her gold and roseate dreams 

And Strength her crowned and mighty reveries; 

Desire climbed up, a swift omnipotent flame, 

And Pleasure had the stature of the gods; 

Dream walked along the highways of the stars; 

Sweet common things turned into miracles: 

Overtaken by the spirit's sudden spell, 

Smitten by a divine passion's alchemy, 

Pain's self compelled transformed to potent joy 

Curing the antithesis twixt heaven and hell. 

All life's high visions are embodied there, 

Her wandering hopes achieved, her aureate combs 

Caught by the honey-eater's darting tongue, 

Her burning guesses changed to ecstasied truths, 

Her mighty pantings stilled in deathless calm 

And liberated her immense desires. 

In that paradise of perfect heart and sense 

No lower note could break the endless charm 

Of her sweetness ardent and immaculate; 

Her steps are sure of their intuitive fall. 

After the anguish of the soul's long strife 

At length were found calm and celestial rest 

And, lapped in a magic flood of sorrowless hours, 

Healed were his warrior nature's wounded limbs 

In the encircling arms of Energies 

That brooked no stain and feared not their own bliss. 

In scenes forbidden to our pallid sense 

Amid miraculous scents and wonder-hues 

He met the forms that divinise the sight, 

To music that can immortalise the mind 

And make the heart wide as infinity 

Listened, and captured the inaudible</div>

<div class="page"><h3>236</h3>


Cadences that awake the occult ear: 

Out of the ineffable hush it hears them come 

Trembling with the beauty of a wordless speech, 

And thoughts too great and deep to find a voice, 

Thoughts whose desire new-makes the universe. 

A scale of sense that climbed with fiery feet 

To heights of unimagined happiness, 

Recast his being's aura in joy-glow, 

His body glimmered like a skiey shell; 

His gates to the world were swept with seas of light. 

His earth, dowered with celestial competence, 

Harboured a power that needed now no more 

To cross the closed customs-line of mind and flesh 

And smuggle godhead into humanity. 

It shrank no more from the supreme demand 

Of an untired capacity for bliss, 

A might that could explore its own infinite 

And beauty and passion and the depths' reply 

Nor feared the swoon of glad identity 

Where spirit and flesh in inner ecstasy join 

Annulling the quarrel between self and shape. 

It drew from sight and sound spiritual power, 

Made sense a road to reach the intangible: 

It thrilled with the supernal influences 

That build the substance of life's deeper soul. 

Earth-nature stood reborn, comrade of heaven. 

A fit companion of the timeless Kings, 

Equalled with the godheads of the living Suns, 

He mixed in the radiant pastimes of the Unborn, 

Heard whispers of the Player never seen 

And listened to his voice that steals the heart 

And draws it to the breast of God's desire, 

And felt its honey of felicity 

Flow through his veins like the rivers of Paradise, 

Made body a nectar-cup of the Absolute. 

In sudden moments of revealing flame,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>237</h3>


In passionate responses half-unveiled 

He reached the rim of ecstasies unknown; 

A touch supreme surprised his hurrying heart, 

The clasp was remembered of the Wonderful, 

And hints leaped down of white beatitudes. 

Eternity drew close disguised as Love 

And laid its hand upon the body of Time. 

A little gift comes from the Immensitudes, 

But measureless to life its gain of joy; 

All the untold Beyond is mirrored there. 

A giant drop of the Bliss unknowable 

Overwhelmed his limbs and round his soul became 

A fiery ocean of felicity; 

He foundered drowned in sweet and burning vasts: 

The dire delight that could shatter mortal flesh, 

The rapture that the gods sustain he bore. 

Immortal pleasure cleansed him in its waves 

And turned his strength into undying power. 

Immortality captured Time and carried Life.</div>

