As received on WhatsApp August 8th 2017

YES, I AM CHANGING!

Days slip into weeks, weeks turn into months and months transform into years. Calendars are changing and so am I.

Yes, I am changing. In certain things age has mellowed me down, in others I have become more aggressive. Sometimes I find myself acting very wise and sometimes I just go crazy. Certain issues will have me speaking vociferously whereas at others I just shrug and remain silent.

Yes, I am changing. After loving my parents, my siblings, my spouse, my children, my friends, now I have started loving myself.

Yes, I am changing. I just realised that I am not "Atlas" and the world does not rest on my shoulders.

Yes, I am changing. I now stopped bargaining with poor vegetables and fruits vendors. After all, a few rupees more is not going to burn a hole in my pocket but it might help the poor fellow save for his daughter’s school fees.

Yes, I am changing. I pay the auto walla/ cab waala and walk away without waiting for the change. The extra money might bring a smile on his face.After all he is toiling much harder for a living than me.

Yes, I am changing. I stopped telling the elderly that they have already narrated that story many times. After all, the story makes them walk down the memory lane and relive the past.

Yes, I am changing. I have learn not to correct people even when I know they are wrong. After all, the onus of making everyone perfect is not on me.Peace is more precious than perfection.

Yes, I am changing. I give compliments freely and generously . After all its a mood enhancer not only for the recipient but also for me.

Yes, I am changing. I have learnt not to bother about my creased shirt or mismatched skirt.After all, personality speaks louder than appearances.

Yes, I am changing. Nowadays I don't bother if my eyebrows are not done or fine lines are showing on my forehead. After all beauty of my soul outshines the beauty of my face.

Yes, I am changing. I am learning not to let others make me feel incompetent. After all I am not only what they see in me. I might not be good at certain things but I am excellent at others. 

Yes, I am changing. I walk away from people who don't value me. After all, they might not know my worth, but I do.

Yes, I am changing. I remain cool when someone plays dirty politics to outrun me in the rat race. After all I am not a rat and neither am I in any race.

Yes, I am changing. I am learning not to be embarrassed by my emotions. After all it's my emotions that make me human.

Yes, I am changing. I now tell people if I like them.After all, there is nothing wrong in liking someone.

Yes, I am changing. I have learnt that its better to drop the ego than to break a relationship. After all, my ego will keep me aloof whereas with relationships I will never be alone.

Yes, I am changing. I demand for whatever is due to me. After all, accepting injustice is almost as bad as doing injustice.

Yes, I am changing. I have learnt to live each day as if it were the last. After all, it might be the last .

Yes, I am changing. I am doing what makes me happy. After all, I am responsible for my happiness, and I owe it to me.

And I am loving the new me!