<h2>Book 10 Canto 4 - The Book of the Double Twilight - The Dream Twilight of the Ideal</h2>

<div class="page"><h3>641</h3>


There came a slope that slowly downward sank; 

It slipped towards a stumbling grey descent. 

The dim-heart marvel of the ideal was lost; 

Its crowding wonder of bright delicate dreams 

And vague half-limned sublimities she had left: 

Thought fell towards lower levels; hard and tense 

It passioned for some crude reality. 

The twilight floated still but changed its hues 

And heavily swathed a less delightful dream; 

It settled in tired masses on the air; 

Its symbol colours tuned with duller reds 

And almost seemed a lurid mist of day. 

A straining taut and dire besieged her heart; 

Heavy her sense grew with a dangerous load, 

And sadder, greater sounds were in her ears, 

And through stern breakings of the lambent glare 

Her vision caught a hurry of driving plains 

And cloudy mountains and wide tawny streams, 

And cities climbed in minarets and towers 

Towards an unavailing changeless sky: 

Long quays and ghauts and harbours white with sails 

Challenged her sight awhile and then were gone. 

Amidst them travailed toiling multitudes 

In ever shifting perishable groups, 

A foiled cinema of lit shadowy shapes 

Enveloped in the grey mantle of a dream. 

Imagining meanings in life's heavy drift, 

They trusted in the uncertain environment 

And waited for death to change their spirit's scene. 

A savage din of labour and a tramp 

Of armoured life and the monotonous hum</div>

<div class="page"><h3>642</h3>


Of thoughts and acts that ever were the same, 

As if the dull reiterated drone 

Of a great brute machine, beset her soul,-- 

A grey dissatisfied rumour like a ghost 

Of the moaning of a loud unquiet sea. 

A huge inhuman cyclopean voice, 

A Babel-builders' song towering to heaven, 

A throb of engines and the clang of tools 

Brought the deep undertone of labour's pain. 

As when pale lightnings tear a tortured sky, 

High overhead a cloud-rimmed series flared 

Chasing like smoke from a red funnel driven, 

The forced creations of an ignorant Mind: 

Drifting she saw like pictured fragments flee 

Phantoms of human thought and baffled hopes, 

The shapes of Nature and the arts of man, 

Philosophies and disciplines and laws, 

And the dead spirit of old societies, 

Constructions of the Titan and the worm. 

As if lost remnants of forgotten light, 

Before her mind there fled with trailing wings 

Dimmed revelations and delivering words, 

Emptied of their mission and their strength to save, 

The messages of the evangelist gods, 

Voices of prophets, scripts of vanishing creeds. 

Each in its hour eternal claimed went by: 

Ideals, systems, sciences, poems, crafts 

Tireless there perished and again recurred, 

Sought restlessly by some creative Power; 

But all were dreams crossing an empty vast. 

Ascetic voices called of lonely seers 

On mountain summits or by river banks 

Or from the desolate heart of forest glades 

Seeking heaven's rest or the spirit's worldless peace, 

Or in bodies motionless like statues, fixed 

In tranced cessations of their sleepless thought</div>

<div class="page"><h3>643</h3>


Sat sleeping souls, and this too was a dream. 

All things the past has made and slain were there, 

Its lost forgotten forms that once had lived, 

And all the present loves as new-revealed 

And all the hopes the future brings had failed 

Already, caught and spent in efforts vain, 

Repeated fruitlessly age after age. 

Unwearied all returned insisting still 

Because of joy in the anguish of pursuit 

And joy to labour and to win and lose 

And joy to create and keep and joy to kill. 

The rolling cycles passed and came again, 

Brought the same toils and the same barren end, 

Forms ever new and ever old, the long 

Appalling revolutions of the world.

Once more arose the great destroying Voice: 

Across the fruitless labour of the worlds 

His huge denial's all-defeating might 

Pursued the ignorant march of dolorous Time. 

&amp;Behold the figures of this symbol realm, 

Its solid outlines of creative dream 

Inspiring the great concrete tasks of earth. 

In its motion-parable of human life 

Here thou canst trace the outcome Nature gives 

To the sin of being and the error in things 

And the desire that compels to live 

And man's incurable malady of hope. 

In an immutable order's hierarchy 

Where Nature changes not, man cannot change: 

Ever he obeys her fixed mutation's law; 

In a new version of her oft-told tale 

In ever-wheeling cycles turns the race. 

His mind is pent in circling boundaries: 

For mind is man, beyond thought he cannot soar. 

If he could leave his limits he would be safe:</div>

<div class="page"><h3>644</h3>


He sees but cannot mount to his greater heavens; 

Even winged, he sinks back to his native soil. 

He is a captive in his net of mind 

And beats soul-wings against the walls of life. 

In vain his heart lifts up its yearning prayer, 

Peopling with brilliant Gods the formless Void; 

Then disappointed to the Void he turns 

And in its happy nothingness asks release, 

The calm Nirvana of his dream of self: 

The Word in silence ends, in Nought the name. 

Apart amid the mortal multitudes, 

He calls the Godhead incommunicable 

To be the lover of his lonely soul 

Or casts his spirit into its void embrace. 

Or he finds his copy in the impartial All; 

He imparts to the Immobile his own will, 

Attributes to the Eternal wrath and love 

And to the Ineffable lends a thousand names. 

Hope not to call God down into his life. 

How shalt thou bring the Everlasting here? 

There is no house for him in hurrying Time. 

Vainly thou seekst in Matter's world an aim; 

No aim is there, only a will to be. 

All walk by Nature bound for ever the same. 

Look on these forms that stay awhile and pass, 

These lives that long and strive, then are no more, 

These structures that have no abiding truth, 

The saviour creeds that cannot save themselves, 

But perish in the strangling hands of the years, 

Discarded from man's thought, proved false by Time, 

Philosophies that strip all problems bare 

But nothing ever have solved since earth began, 

And sciences omnipotent in vain 

By which men learn of what the suns are made, 

Transform all forms to serve their outward needs, 

Ride through the sky and sail beneath the sea,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>645</h3>


But learn not what they are or why they came; 

These polities, architectures of man's brain, 

That, bricked with evil and good, wall in man's spirit 

And, fissured houses, palace at once and jail, 

Rot while they reign and crumble before they crash; 

These revolutions, demon or drunken god, 

Convulsing the wounded body of mankind 

Only to paint in new colours an old face; 

These wars, carnage triumphant, ruin gone mad, 

The work of centuries vanishing in an hour, 

The blood of the vanquished and the victor's crown 

Which men to be born must pay for with their pain, 

The hero's face divine on satyr's limbs, 

The demon's grandeur mixed with the demigod's, 

The glory and the beasthood and the shame; 

Why is it all, the labour and the din, 

The transient joys, the timeless sea of tears, 

The longing and the hoping and the cry, 

The battle and the victory and the fall, 

The aimless journey that can never pause, 

The waking toil, the incoherent sleep, 

Song, shouts and weeping, wisdom and idle words, 

The laughter of men, the irony of the gods? 

Where leads the march, whither the pilgrimage? 

Who keeps the map of the route or planned each stage? 

Or else self-moved the world walks its own way, 

Or nothing is there but only a Mind that dreams: 

The world is a myth that happened to come true, 

A legend told to itself by conscious Mind, 

Imaged and played on a feigned Matter's ground 

On which it stands in an unsubstantial Vast. 

Mind is the author, spectator, actor, stage: 

Mind only is and what it thinks is seen. 

If Mind is all, renounce the hope of bliss; 

If Mind is all, renounce the hope of Truth. 

For Mind can never touch the body of Truth</div>

<div class="page"><h3>646</h3>


And Mind can never see the soul of God; 

Only his shadow it grasps nor hears his laugh 

As it turns from him to the vain seeming of things. 

Mind is a tissue woven of light and shade 

Where right and wrong have sewn their mingled parts; 

Or Mind is Nature's marriage of convenance 

Between truth and falsehood, between joy and pain: 

This struggling pair no court can separate. 

Each thought is a gold coin with bright alloy 

And error and truth are its obverse and reverse: 

This is the imperial mintage of the brain 

And of this kind is all its currency. 

Think not to plant on earth the living Truth 

Or make of Matter's world the home of God; 

Truth comes not there but only the thought of Truth, 

God is not there but only the name of God. 

If Self there is it is bodiless and unborn; 

It is no one and it is possessed by none. 

On what shalt thou then build thy happy world? 

Cast off thy life and mind, then art thou Self, 

An all-seeing omnipresence stark, alone. 

If God there is he cares not for the world; 

All things he sees with calm indifferent gaze, 

He has doomed all hearts to sorrow and desire, 

He has bound all life with his implacable laws; 

He answers not the ignorant voice of prayer. 

Eternal while the ages toil beneath, 

Unmoved, untouched by aught that he has made, 

He sees as minute details mid the stars 

The animal's agony and the fate of man: 

Immeasurably wise, he exceeds thy thought; 

His solitary joy needs not thy love. 

His truth in human thinking cannot dwell: 

If thou desirest Truth, then still thy mind 

For ever, slain by the dumb unseen Light. 

Immortal bliss lives not in human air:</div>

<div class="page"><h3>647</h3>


How shall the mighty Mother her calm delight 

Keep fragrant in this narrow fragile vase, 

Or lodge her sweet unbroken ecstasy 

In hearts which earthly sorrow can assail 

And bodies careless Death can slay at will? 

Dream not to change the world that God has planned, 

Strive not to alter his eternal law. 

If heavens there are whose gates are shut to grief, 

There seek the joy thou couldst not find on earth; 

Or in the imperishable hemisphere 

Where Light is native and Delight is king 

And Spirit is the deathless ground of things, 

Choose thy high station, child of Eternity. 

If thou art Spirit and Nature is thy robe, 

Cast off thy garb and be thy naked self 

Immutable in its undying truth, 

Alone for ever in the mute Alone. 

Turn then to God, for him leave all behind; 

Forgetting love, forgetting Satyavan, 

Annul thyself in his immobile peace. 

O soul, drown in his still beatitude. 

For thou must die to thyself to reach God's height: 

I, Death, am the gate of immortality.&amp; 

But Savitri answered to the sophist God: 

&amp;Once more wilt thou call Light to blind Truth's eyes, 

Make Knowledge a catch of the snare of Ignorance 

And the Word a dart to slay my living soul? 

Offer, O King, thy boons to tired spirits 

And hearts that could not bear the wounds of Time, 

Let those who were tied to body and to mind, 

Tear off those bonds and flee into white calm 

Crying for a refuge from the play of God. 

Surely thy boons are great since thou art He! 

But how shall I seek rest in endless peace 

Who house the mighty Mother's violent force, 

Her vision turned to read the enigmaed world,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>648</h3>


Her will tempered in the blaze of Wisdom's sun 

And the flaming silence of her heart of love? 

The world is a spiritual paradox 

Invented by a need in the Unseen, 

A poor translation to the creature's sense 

Of That which for ever exceeds idea and speech, 

A symbol of what can never be symbolised, 

A language mispronounced, misspelt, yet true. 

Its powers have come from the eternal heights 

And plunged into the inconscient dim Abyss 

And risen from it to do their marvellous work. 

The soul is a figure of the Unmanifest, 

The mind labours to think the Unthinkable, 

The life to call the Immortal into birth, 

The body to enshrine the Illimitable. 

The world is not cut off from Truth and God. 

In vain thou hast dug the dark unbridgeable gulf, 

In vain thou hast built the blind and doorless wall: 

Man's soul crosses through thee to Paradise, 

Heaven's sun forces its way through death and night; 

Its light is seen upon our being's verge. 

My mind is a torch lit from the eternal sun, 

My life a breath drawn by the immortal Guest, 

My mortal body is the Eternal's house. 

Already the torch becomes the undying ray, 

Already the life is the Immortal's force, 

The house grows of the householder part and one. 

How sayst thou Truth can never light the human mind 

And Bliss can never invade the mortal's heart 

Or God descend into the world he made? 

If in the meaningless Void creation rose, 

If from a bodiless Force Matter was born, 

If Life could climb in the unconscious tree, 

Its green delight break into emerald leaves 

And its laughter of beauty blossom in the flower, 

If sense could wake in tissue, nerve and cell</div>

<div class="page"><h3>649</h3>


And Thought seize the grey matter of the brain, 

And soul peep from its secrecy through the flesh, 

How shall the nameless Light not leap on men, 

And unknown powers emerge from Nature's sleep? 

Even now hints of a luminous Truth like stars 

Arise in the mind-mooned splendour of Ignorance; 

Even now the deathless Lover's touch we feel: 

If the chamber's door is even a little ajar, 

What then can hinder God from stealing in 

Or who forbid his kiss on the sleeping soul? 

Already God is near, the Truth is close: 

Because the dark atheist body knows him not, 

Must the sage deny the Light, the seer his soul? 

I am not bound by thought or sense or shape; 

I live in the glory of the Infinite, 

I am near to the Nameless and Unknowable, 

The Ineffable is now my household mate. 

But standing on Eternity's luminous brink 

I have discovered that the world was He; 

I have met Spirit with spirit, Self with self, 

But I have loved too the body of my God. 

I have pursued him in his earthly form. 

A lonely freedom cannot satisfy 

A heart that has grown one with every heart: 

I am a deputy of the aspiring world, 

My spirit's liberty I ask for all.&amp;

Then rang again a deeper cry of Death. 

As if beneath its weight of sterile law 

Oppressed by its own obstinate meaningless will, 

Disdainful, weary and compassionate, 

It kept no more its old intolerant sound, 

But seemed like life's in her unnumbered paths 

Toiling for ever and achieving nought 

Because of birth and change, her mortal powers 

By which she lasts, around the term-posts fixed</div>

<div class="page"><h3>650</h3>


Turning of a wide circling aimless race 

Whose course for ever speeds and is the same. 

In its long play with Fate and Chance and Time 

Assured of the game's vanity lost or won, 

Crushed by its load of ignorance and doubt 

Which knowledge seems to increase and growth to enlarge, 

The earth-mind sinks and it despairs and looks 

Old, weary and discouraged on its work. 

Yet was all nothing then or vainly achieved? 

Some great thing has been done, some light, some power 

Delivered from the huge Inconscient's grasp: 

It has emerged from night; it sees its dawns 

Circling for ever though no dawn can stay. 

This change was in the godhead's far-flung voice; 

His form of dread was altered and admitted 

Our transient effort at eternity, 

Yet flung vast doubts of what might else have been 

On grandiose hints of an impossible day. 

The great voice surging cried to Savitri: 

&amp;Because thou knowst the wisdom that transcends 

Both veil of forms and the contempt of forms, 

Arise delivered by the seeing gods. 

If free thou hadst kept thy mind from life's fierce stress, 

Thou mightst have been like them omniscient, calm. 

But the violent and passionate heart forbids. 

It is the storm bird of an anarch Power 

That would upheave the world and tear from it 

The indecipherable scroll of Fate, 

Death's rule and Law and the unknowable Will. 

Hasteners to action, violators of God 

Are these great spirits who have too much love, 

And they who formed like thee, for both art thou, 

Have come into the narrow bounds of life 

With too large natures overleaping time. 

Worshippers of force who know not her recoil, 

Their giant wills compel the troubled years.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>651</h3>


The wise are tranquil; silent the great hills 

Rise ceaselessly towards their unreached sky, 

Seated on their unchanging base, their heads 

Dreamless in heaven's immutable domain. 

On their aspiring tops, sublime and still, 

Lifting half-way to heaven the climbing soul 

The mighty mediators stand content 

To watch the revolutions of the stars: 

Motionlessly moving with the might of earth, 

They see the ages pass and are the same. 

The wise think with the cycles, they hear the tread 

Of far-off things; patient, unmoved they keep 

Their dangerous wisdom in their depths restrained, 

Lest man's frail days into the unknown should sink 

Dragged like a ship by bound leviathan 

Into the abyss of his stupendous seas. 

Lo, how all shakes when the gods tread too near! 

All moves, is in peril, anguished, torn, upheaved. 

The hurrying aeons would stumble on too swift 

If strength from heaven surprised the imperfect earth 

And veilless knowledge smote these unfit souls. 

The deities have screened their dreadful power: 

God hides his thought and, even, he seems to err. 

Be still and tardy in the slow wise world. 

Mighty art thou with the dread goddess filled, 

To whom thou criedst at dawn in the dim woods. 

Use not thy strength like the wild Titan souls! 

Touch not the seated lines, the ancient laws, 

Respect the calm of great established things.&amp; 

But Savitri replied to the huge god: 

&amp;What is the calm thou vauntst, O Law, O Death? 

Is it not the dull-visioned tread inert 

Of monstrous energies chained in a stark round 

Soulless and stone-eyed with mechanic dreams? 

Vain the soul's hope if changeless Law is all: 

Ever to the new and the unknown press on</div>

<div class="page"><h3>652</h3>


The speeding aeons justifying God. 

What were earth's ages if the grey restraint 

Were never broken and glories sprang not forth 

Bursting their obscure seed, while man's slow life 

Leaped hurried into sudden splendid paths 

By divine words and human gods revealed? 

Impose not upon sentient minds and hearts 

The dull fixity that binds inanimate things. 

Well is the unconscious rule for the animal breeds 

Content to live beneath the immutable yoke; 

Man turns to a nobler walk, a master path. 

I trample on thy law with living feet; 

For to arise in freedom I was born. 

If I am mighty let my force be unveiled 

Equal companion of the dateless powers, 

Or else let my frustrated soul sink down 

Unworthy of Godhead in the original sleep. 

I claim from Time my will's eternity, 

God from his moments.&amp; Death replied to her, 

&amp;Why should the noble and immortal will 

Stoop to the petty works of transient earth, 

Freedom forgotten and the Eternal's path? 

Or is this the high use of strength and thought, 

To struggle with the bonds of death and time 

And spend the labour that might earn the gods 

And battle and bear agony of wounds 

To grasp the trivial joys that earth can guard 

In her small treasure-chest of passing things? 

Child, hast thou trodden the gods beneath thy feet 

Only to win poor shreds of earthly life 

For him thou lov'st cancelling the grand release, 

Keeping from early rapture of the heavens 

His soul the lenient deities have called? 

Are thy arms sweeter than the courts of God?&amp; 

She answered, &amp;Straight I trample on the road 

The strong hand hewed for me which planned our paths.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>653</h3>


I run where his sweet dreadful voice commands 

And I am driven by the reins of God. 

Why drew he wide his scheme of mighty worlds 

Or filled infinity with his passionate breath? 

Or wherefore did he build my mortal form 

And sow in me his bright and proud desires, 

If not to achieve, to flower in me, to love, 

Carving his human image richly shaped 

In thoughts and largenesses and golden powers? 

Far Heaven can wait our coming in its calm. 

Easy the heavens were to build for God. 

Earth was his difficult matter, earth the glory 

Gave of the problem and the race and strife. 

There are the ominous masks, the terrible powers; 

There it is greatness to create the gods. 

Is not the spirit immortal and absolved 

Always, delivered from the grasp of Time? 

Why came it down into the mortal's Space? 

A charge he gave to his high spirit in man 

And wrote a hidden decree on Nature's tops. 

Freedom is this with ever seated soul, 

Large in life's limits, strong in Matter's knots, 

Building great stuff of action from the worlds 

To make fine wisdom from coarse, scattered strands 

And love and beauty out of war and night, 

The wager wonderful, the game divine. 

What liberty has the soul which feels not free 

Unless stripped bare and cannot kiss the bonds 

The Lover winds around his playmate's limbs, 

Choosing his tyranny, crushed in his embrace? 

To seize him better with her boundless heart 

She accepts the limiting circle of his arms, 

Bows full of bliss beneath his mastering hands 

And laughs in his rich constraints, most bound, most free. 

This is my answer to thy lures, O Death.&amp;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>654</h3>


Immutable, Death's denial met her cry: 

&amp;However mighty, whatever thy secret name 

Uttered in hidden conclaves of the gods, 

Thy heart's ephemeral passion cannot break 

The iron rampart of accomplished things 

With which the great Gods fence their camp in Space. 

Whoever thou art behind thy human mask, 

Even if thou art the Mother of the worlds 

And pegst thy claim upon the realms of Chance, 

The cosmic Law is greater than thy will. 

Even God himself obeys the Laws he made: 

The Law abides and never can it change, 

The Person is a bubble on Time's sea. 

A forerunner of a greater Truth to come, 

Thy soul creator of its freer Law, 

Vaunting a Force behind on which it leans, 

A Light above which none but thou hast seen, 

Thou claimst the first fruits of Truth's victory. 

But what is Truth and who can find her form 

Amid the specious images of sense, 

Amid the crowding guesses of the mind 

And the dark ambiguities of a world 

Peopled with the incertitudes of Thought? 

For where is Truth and when was her footfall heard 

Amid the endless clamour of Time's mart 

And which is her voice amid the thousand cries 

That cross the listening brain and cheat the soul? 

Or is Truth aught but a high starry name 

Or a vague and splendid word by which man's thought 

Sanctions and consecrates his nature's choice, 

The heart's wish donning knowledge as its robe, 

The cherished idea elect among the elect, 

Thought's favourite mid the children of half-light 

Who high-voiced crowd the playgrounds of the mind 

Or people its dormitories in infant sleep? 

All things hang here between God's yes and no,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>655</h3>


Two Powers real but to each other untrue, 

Two consort stars in the mooned night of mind 

That towards two opposite horizons gaze, 

The white head and black tail of the mystic drake, 

The swift and the lame foot, wing strong, wing broken 

Sustaining the body of the uncertain world, 

A great surreal dragon in the skies. 

Too dangerously thy high proud truth must live 

Entangled in Matter's mortal littleness. 

All in this world is true, yet all is false: 

Its thoughts into an eternal cipher run, 

Its deeds swell to Time's rounded zero sum. 

Thus man at once is animal and god, 

A disparate enigma of God's make 

Unable to free the Godhead's form within, 

A being less than himself, yet something more, 

The aspiring animal, the frustrate god 

Yet neither beast nor deity but man, 

But man tied to the kind earth's labour strives to exceed 

Climbing the stairs of God to higher things. 

Objects are seemings and none knows their truth, 

Ideas are guesses of an ignorant god. 

Truth has no home in earth's irrational breast: 

Yet without reason life is a tangle of dreams, 

But reason is poised above a dim abyss 

And stands at last upon a plank of doubt. 

Eternal truth lives not with mortal men. 

Or if she dwells within thy mortal heart, 

Show me the body of the living Truth 

Or draw for me the outline of her face 

That I too may obey and worship her. 

Then will I give thee back thy Satyavan. 

But here are only facts and steel-bound Law. 

This truth I know that Satyavan is dead 

And even thy sweetness cannot lure him back. 

No magic Truth can bring the dead to life,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>656</h3>


No power of earth cancel the thing once done, 

No joy of the heart can last surviving death, 

No bliss persuade the past to live again. 

But Life alone can solace the mute Void 

And fill with thought the emptiness of Time. 

Leave then thy dead, O Savitri, and live.&amp; 

The Woman answered to the mighty Shade, 

And as she spoke, mortality disappeared; 

Her Goddess self grew visible in her eyes, 

Light came, a dream of heaven, into her face. 

&amp;O Death, thou too art God and yet not He, 

But only his own black shadow on his path 

As leaving the Night he takes the upward Way 

And drags with him its clinging inconscient Force. 

Of God unconscious thou art the dark head, 

Of his Ignorance thou art the impenitent sign, 

Of its vast tenebrous womb the natural child, 

On his immortality the sinister bar. 

All contraries are aspects of God's face. 

The Many are the innumerable One, 

The One carries the multitude in his breast; 

He is the Impersonal, inscrutable, sole, 

He is the one infinite Person seeing his world; 

The Silence bears the Eternal's great dumb seal, 

His light inspires the eternal Word; 

He is the Immobile's deep and deathless hush, 

Its white and signless blank negating calm, 

Yet stands the creator Self, the almighty Lord 

And watches his will done by the forms of Gods 

And the desire that goads half-conscious man 

And the reluctant and unseeing Night. 

These wide divine extremes, these inverse powers 

Are the right and left side of the body of God; 

Existence balanced twixt two mighty arms 

Confronts the mind with unsolved abysms of Thought. 

Darkness below, a fathomless Light above,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>657</h3>


In Light are joined, but sundered by severing Mind 

Stand face to face, opposite, inseparable, 

Two contraries needed for his great World-task, 

Two poles whose currents wake the immense World-Force. 

In the stupendous secrecy of his Self, 

Above the world brooding with equal wings, 

He is both in one, beginningless, without end: 

Transcending both, he enters the Absolute. 

His being is a mystery beyond mind, 

His ways bewilder mortal ignorance; 

The finite in its little sections parked, 

Amazed, credits not God's audacity 

Who dares to be the unimagined All 

And see and act as might one Infinite. 

Against human reason this is his offence, 

Being known to be for ever unknowable, 

To be all and yet transcend the mystic whole, 

Absolute, to lodge in a relative world of Time, 

Eternal and all-knowing, to suffer birth, 

Omnipotent, to sport with Chance and Fate, 

Spirit, yet to be Matter and the Void, 

Illimitable, beyond form or name, 

To dwell within a body, one and supreme 

To be animal and human and divine: 

A still deep sea, he laughs in rolling waves; 

Universal, he is all,--transcendent, none. 

To man's righteousness this is his cosmic crime, 

Almighty beyond good and evil to dwell 

Leaving the good to their fate in a wicked world 

And evil to reign in this enormous scene. 

All opposition seems and strife and chance, 

An aimless labour with but scanty sense, 

To eyes that see a part and miss the whole; 

The surface men scan, the depths refuse their search: 

A hybrid mystery challenges the view, 

Or a discouraging sordid miracle.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>658</h3>


Yet in the exact Inconscient's stark conceit, 

In the casual error of the world's ignorance 

A plan, a hidden Intelligence is glimpsed. 

There is a purpose in each stumble and fall; 

Nature's most careless lolling is a pose 

Preparing some forward step, some deep result. 

Ingenious notes plugged into a motived score, 

These million discords dot the harmonious theme 

Of the evolution's huge orchestral dance. 

A Truth supreme has forced the world to be; 

It has wrapped itself in Matter as in a shroud, 

A shroud of Death, a shroud of Ignorance. 

It compelled the suns to burn through silent Space, 

Flame-signs of its uncomprehended Thought 

In a wide brooding ether's formless muse: 

It made of Knowledge a veiled and struggling light, 

Of Being a substance nescient, dense and dumb, 

Of Bliss the beauty of an insentient world. 

In finite things the conscious Infinite dwells: 

Involved it sleeps in Matter's helpless trance, 

It rules the world from its sleeping senseless Void; 

Dreaming it throws out mind and heart and soul 

To labour crippled, bound, on the hard earth; 

A broken whole it works through scattered points; 

Its gleaming shards are Wisdom's diamond thoughts, 

Its shadowy reflex our ignorance. 

It starts from the mute mass in countless jets, 

It fashions a being out of brain and nerve, 

A sentient creature from its pleasures and pangs. 

A pack of feelings obscure, a dot of sense 

Survives awhile answering the shocks of life, 

Then, crushed or its force spent, leaves the dead form, 

Leaves the huge universe in which it lived 

An insignificant unconsidered guest. 

But the soul grows concealed within its house; 

It gives to the body its strength and magnificence;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>659</h3>


It follows aims in an ignorant aimless world, 

It lends significance to earth's meaningless life. 

A demigod animal, came thinking man; 

He wallows in mud, yet heavenward soars in thought; 

He plays and ponders, laughs and weeps and dreams, 

Satisfies his little longings like the beast; 

He pores upon life's book with student eyes. 

Out of this tangle of intellect and sense, 

Out of the narrow scope of finite thought 

At last he wakes into spiritual mind; 

A high liberty begins and luminous room: 

He glimpses eternity, touches the infinite, 

He meets the gods in great and sudden hours, 

He feels the universe as his larger self, 

Makes Space and Time his opportunity 

To join the heights and depths of being in light, 

In the heart's cave speaks secretly with God. 

But these are touches and high moments lived; 

Fragments of Truth supreme have lit his soul, 

Reflections of the sun in waters still. 

A few have dared the last supreme ascent 

And break through borders of blinding light above, 

And feel a breath around of mightier air, 

Receive a vaster being's messages 

And bathe in its immense intuitive Ray. 

On summit Mind are radiant altitudes 

Exposed to the lustre of Infinity, 

Outskirts and dependencies of the house of Truth, 

Upraised estates of Mind and measureless. 

There man can visit but there he cannot live. 

A cosmic Thought spreads out its vastitudes; 

Its smallest parts are here philosophies 

Challenging with their detailed immensity, 

Each figuring an omniscient scheme of things. 

But higher still can climb the ascending light; 

There are vasts of vision and eternal suns,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>660</h3>


Oceans of an immortal luminousness, 

Flame-hills assaulting heaven with their peaks, 

There dwelling all becomes a blaze of sight; 

A burning head of vision leads the mind, 

Thought trails behind it its long comet tail; 

The heart glows, an illuminate and seer, 

And sense is kindled into identity. 

A highest flight climbs to a deepest view: 

In a wide opening of its native sky 

Intuition's lightnings range in a bright pack 

Hunting all hidden truths out of their lairs, 

Its fiery edge of seeing absolute 

Cleaves into locked unknown retreats of self, 

Rummages the sky-recesses of the brain, 

Lights up the occult chambers of the heart; 

Its spear-point ictus of discovery 

Pressed on the cover of name, the screen of form, 

Strips bare the secret soul of all that is. 

Thought there has revelation's sun-bright eyes; 

The Word, a mighty and inspiring Voice, 

Enters Truth's inmost cabin of privacy 

And tears away the veil from God and life. 

Then stretches the boundless finite's last expanse, 

The cosmic empire of the Overmind, 

Time's buffer state bordering Eternity, 

Too vast for the experience of man's soul: 

All here gathers beneath one golden sky: 

The Powers that build the cosmos station take 

In its house of infinite possibility; 

Each god from there builds his own nature's world; 

Ideas are phalanxed like a group of suns, 

Each marshalling his company of rays. 

Thought crowds in masses seized by one regard; 

All Time is one body, Space a single look: 

There is the Godhead's universal gaze 

And there the boundaries of immortal Mind:</div>

<div class="page"><h3>661</h3>


The line that parts and joins the hemispheres 

Closes in on the labour of the Gods 

Fencing eternity from the toil of Time. 

In her glorious kingdom of eternal light 

All-ruler, ruled by none, the Truth supreme, 

Omnipotent, omniscient and alone, 

In a golden country keeps her measureless house; 

In its corridor she hears the tread that comes 

Out of the Unmanifest never to return 

Till the Unknown is known and seen by men. 

Above the stretch and blaze of cosmic Sight, 

Above the silence of the wordless Thought, 

Formless creator of immortal forms, 

Nameless, investitured with the name divine, 

Transcending Time's hours, transcending Timelessness, 

The Mighty Mother sits in lucent calm 

And holds the eternal Child upon her knees 

Attending the day when he shall speak to Fate. 

There is the image of our future's hope; 

There is the sun for which all darkness waits, 

There is the imperishable harmony; 

The world's contradictions climb to her and are one: 

There is the Truth of which the world's truths are shreds, 

The Light of which the world's ignorance is the shade 

Till Truth draws back the shade that it has cast, 

The Love our hearts call down to heal all strife, 

The Bliss for which the world's derelict sorrows yearn: 

Thence comes the glory sometimes seen on earth, 

The visits of Godhead to the human soul, 

The Beauty and the dream on Nature's face. 

There the perfection born from eternity 

Calls to it the perfection born in Time, 

The truth of God surprising human life, 

The image of God overtaking finite shapes. 

There in a world of everlasting Light, 

In the realms of the immortal Supermind</div>

<div class="page"><h3>662</h3>


Truth who hides here her head in mystery, 

Her riddle deemed by reason impossible 

In the stark structure of material form, 

Unenigmaed lives, unmasked her face and there 

Is Nature and the common law of things. 

There in a body made of spirit stuff, 

The hearth-stone of the everliving Fire, 

Action translates the movements of the soul, 

Thought steps infallible and absolute 

And life is a continual worship's rite, 

A sacrifice of rapture to the One. 

A cosmic vision, a spiritual sense 

Feels all the Infinite lodged in finite form 

And seen through a quivering ecstasy of light 

Discovers the bright face of the Bodiless, 

In the truth of a moment, in the moment's soul 

Can sip the honey-wine of Eternity. 

A Spirit who is no one and innumerable, 

The one mystic infinite Person of his world 

Multiplies his myriad personality, 

On all his bodies seals his divinity's stamp 

And sits in each immortal and unique. 

The Immobile stands behind each daily act, 

A background of the movement and the scene, 

Upholding creation on its might and calm 

And change on the Immutable's deathless poise. 

The Timeless looks out from the travelling hours; 

The Ineffable puts on a robe of speech 

Where all its words are woven like magic threads 

Moving with beauty, inspiring with their gleam, 

And every thought takes up its destined place 

Recorded in the memory of the world. 

The Truth supreme, vast and impersonal 

Fits faultlessly the hour and circumstance, 

Its substance a pure gold ever the same 

But shaped into vessels for the spirit's use,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>663</h3>


Its gold becomes the wine jar and the vase. 

All there is a supreme epiphany: 

The All-Wonderful makes a marvel of each event, 

The All-Beautiful is a miracle in each shape; 

The All-Blissful smites with rapture the heart's throbs, 

A pure celestial joy is the use of sense. 

Each being there is a member of the Self, 

A portion of the million-thoughted All, 

A claimant to the timeless Unity, 

The many's sweetness, the joy of difference 

Edged with the intimacy of the One. 

&amp;But who can show to thee Truth's glorious face? 

Our human words can only shadow her. 

To thought she is an unthinkable rapture of light, 

To speech a marvel inexpressible. 

O Death, if thou couldst touch the Truth supreme 

Thou wouldst grow suddenly wise and cease to be. 

If our souls could see and love and clasp God's Truth, 

Its infinite radiance would seize our hearts, 

Our being in God's image be remade 

And earthly life become the life divine.&amp; 

Then Death the last time answered Savitri: 

&amp;If Truth supreme transcends her shadow here 

Severed by Knowledge and the climbing vasts, 

What bridge can cross the gulf that she has left 

Between her and the dream-world she has made? 

Or who could hope to bring her down to men 

And persuade to tread the harsh globe with wounded feet 

Leaving her unapproachable glory and bliss, 

Wasting her splendour on pale earthly air? 

Is thine that strength, O beauty of mortal limbs, 

O soul who flutterest to escape my net? 

Who then art thou hiding in human guise? 

Thy voice carries the sound of infinity, 

Knowledge is with thee, Truth speaks through thy words; 

The light of things beyond shines in thy eyes.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>664</h3>


But where is thy strength to conquer Time and Death? 

Hast thou God's force to build heaven's values here? 

For truth and knowledge are an idle gleam 

If Knowledge brings not power to change the world, 

If Might comes not to give to Truth her right. 

A blind Force, not Truth has made this ignorant world, 

A blind Force, not Truth orders the lives of men: 

By Power, not Light, the great Gods rule the world; 

Power is the arm of God, the seal of Fate. 

O human claimant to immortality, 

Reveal thy power, lay bare thy spirit's force, 

Then will I give back to thee Satyavan. 

Or if the Mighty Mother is with thee, 

Show me her face that I may worship her; 

Let deathless eyes look into the eyes of Death, 

An imperishable Force touching brute things 

Transform earth's death into immortal life. 

Then can thy dead return to thee and live. 

The prostrate earth perhaps shall lift her gaze 

And feel near her the secret body of God 

And love and joy overtake fleeing Time.&amp;

And Savitri looked on Death and answered not. 

Almost it seemed as if in his symbol shape 

The world's darkness had consented to Heaven-light 

And God needed no more the Inconscient's screen. 

A mighty transformation came on her. 

A halo of the indwelling Deity, 

The Immortal's lustre that had lit her face 

And tented its radiance in her body's house, 

Overflowing made the air a luminous sea. 

In a flaming moment of apocalypse 

The Incarnation thrust aside its veil. 

A little figure in infinity 

Yet stood and seemed the Eternal's very house, 

As if the world's centre was her very soul</div>

<div class="page"><h3>665</h3>


And all wide space was but its outer robe. 

A curve of the calm hauteur of far heaven 

Descending into earth's humility, 

Her forehead's span vaulted the Omniscient's gaze, 

Her eyes were two stars that watched the universe. 

The Power that from her being's summit reigned, 

The Presence chambered in lotus secrecy, 

Came down and held the centre in her brow 

Where the mind's Lord in his control-room sits; 

There throned on concentration's native seat 

He opens that third mysterious eye in man, 

The Unseen's eye that looks at the unseen, 

When Light with a golden ecstasy fills his brain 

And the Eternal's wisdom drives his choice 

And eternal Will seizes the mortal's will. 

It stirred in the lotus of her throat of song, 

And in her speech throbbed the immortal Word, 

Her life sounded with the steps of the world-soul 

Moving in harmony with the cosmic Thought. 

As glides God's sun into the mystic cave 

Where hides his light from the pursuing gods, 

It glided into the lotus of her heart 

And woke in it the Force that alters Fate. 

It poured into her navel's lotus depth, 

Lodged in the little life-nature's narrow home, 

On the body's longings grew heaven-rapture's flower 

And made desire a pure celestial flame, 

Broke into the cave where coiled World-Energy sleeps 

And smote the thousand-hooded serpent Force 

That blazing towered and clasped the World-Self above, 

Joined Matter's dumbness to the Spirit's hush 

And filled earth's acts with the Spirit's silent power. 

Thus changed she waited for the Word to speak. 

Eternity looked into the eyes of Death 

And Darkness saw God's living Reality. 

Then a Voice was heard that seemed the stillness' self</div>

<div class="page"><h3>666</h3>


Or the low calm utterance of infinity 

When it speaks to the silence in the heart of sleep. 

&amp;I hail thee, almighty and victorious Death, 

Thou grandiose Darkness of the Infinite. 

O Void that makest room for all to be, 

Hunger that gnawest at the universe 

Consuming the cold remnants of the suns 

And eatst the whole world with thy jaws of fire, 

Waster of the energy that has made the stars, 

Inconscience, carrier of the seeds of thought, 

Nescience in which All-Knowledge sleeps entombed 

And slowly emerges in its hollow breast 

Wearing the mind's mask of bright Ignorance. 

Thou art my shadow and my instrument. 

I have given thee thy awful shape of dread 

And thy sharp sword of terror and grief and pain 

To force the soul of man to struggle for light 

On the brevity of his half-conscious days. 

Thou art his spur to greatness in his works, 

The whip to his yearning for eternal bliss, 

His poignant need of immortality. 

Live, Death, awhile, be still my instrument. 

One day man too shall know thy fathomless heart 

Of silence and the brooding peace of Night 

And grave obedience to eternal Law 

And the calm inflexible pity in thy gaze. 

But now, O timeless Mightiness, stand aside 

And leave the path of my incarnate Force. 

Relieve the radiant God from thy black mask: 

Release the soul of the world called Satyavan 

Freed from thy clutch of pain and ignorance 

That he may stand master of life and fate, 

Man's representative in the house of God, 

The mate of Wisdom and the spouse of Light, 

The eternal bridegroom of the eternal bride.&amp; 

She spoke; Death unconvinced resisted still,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>667</h3>


Although he knew refusing still to know, 

Although he saw refusing still to see. 

Unshakable he stood claiming his right. 

His spirit bowed; his will obeyed the law 

Of its own nature binding even on Gods. 

The Two opposed each other face to face. 

His being like a huge fort of darkness towered; 

Around it her light grew, an ocean's siege. 

Awhile the Shade survived defying heaven: 

Assailing in front, oppressing from above, 

A concrete mass of conscious power, he bore 

The tyranny of her divine desire. 

A pressure of intolerable force 

Weighed on his unbowed head and stubborn breast; 

Light like a burning tongue licked up his thoughts, 

Light was a luminous torture in his heart, 

Light coursed, a splendid agony, through his nerves; 

His darkness muttered perishing in her blaze. 

Her mastering Word commanded every limb 

And left no room for his enormous will 

That seemed pushed out into some helpless space 

And could no more re-enter but left him void. 

He called to Night but she fell shuddering back, 

He called to Hell but sullenly it retired: 

He turned to the Inconscient for support, 

From which he was born, his vast sustaining self; 

It drew him back towards boundless vacancy 

As if by himself to swallow up himself: 

He called to his strength, but it refused his call. 

His body was eaten by light, his spirit devoured. 

At last he knew defeat inevitable 

And left crumbling the shape that he had worn, 

Abandoning hope to make man's soul his prey 

And force to be mortal the immortal spirit. 

Afar he fled shunning her dreaded touch 

And refuge took in the retreating Night.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>668</h3>


In the dream twilight of that symbol world 

The dire universal Shadow disappeared 

Vanishing into the Void from which it came. 

As if deprived of its original cause, 

The twilight realm passed fading from their souls, 

And Satyavan and Savitri were alone. 

But neither stirred: between those figures rose 

A mute invisible and translucent wall. 

In the long blank moment's pause nothing could move: 

All waited on the unknown inscrutable Will.</div>

