<h2>Book 3 Canto 2 - The Book of the Divine Mother - The Adoration of the Divine Mother</h2>

<div class="page"><h3>310</h3>


A stillness absolute, incommunicable, 

Meets the sheer self-discovery of the soul; 

A wall of stillness shuts it from the world, 

A gulf of stillness swallows up the sense 

And makes unreal all that mind has known, 

All that the labouring senses still would weave 

Prolonging an imaged unreality. 

Self's vast spiritual silence occupies Space; 

Only the Inconceivable is left, 

Only the Nameless without space and time: 

Abolished is the burdening need of life: 

Thought falls from us, we cease from joy and grief; 

The ego is dead; we are freed from being and care, 

We have done with birth and death and work and fate. 

O soul, it is too early to rejoice! 

Thou hast reached the boundless silence of the Self, 

Thou hast leaped into a glad divine abyss; 

But where hast thou thrown Self's mission and Self's power? 

On what dead bank on the Eternal's road? 

One was within thee who was self and world, 

What hast thou done for his purpose in the stars? 

Escape brings not the victory and the crown! 

Something thou cam'st to do from the Unknown, 

But nothing is finished and the world goes on 

Because only half God's cosmic work is done. 

Only the everlasting No has neared 

And stared into thy eyes and killed thy heart: 

But where is the Lover's everlasting Yes, 

And immortality in the secret heart, 

The voice that chants to the creator Fire, 

The symbolled OM, the great assenting Word,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>311</h3>


The bridge between the rapture and the calm, 

The passion and the beauty of the Bride, 

The chamber where the glorious enemies kiss, 

The smile that saves, the golden peak of things? 

This too is Truth at the mystic fount of Life. 

A black veil has been lifted; we have seen 

The mighty shadow of the omniscient Lord; 

But who has lifted up the veil of light 

And who has seen the body of the King? 

The mystery of God's birth and acts remains 

Leaving unbroken the last chapter's seal, 

Unsolved the riddle of the unfinished Play; 

The cosmic Player laughs within his mask, 

And still the last inviolate secret hides 

Behind the human glory of a Form, 

Behind the gold eidolon of a Name. 

A large white line has figured as a goal, 

But far beyond the ineffable suntracks blaze: 

What seemed the source and end was a wide gate, 

A last bare step into eternity. 

An eye has opened upon timelessness, 

Infinity takes back the forms it gave, 

And through God's darkness or his naked light 

His million rays return into the Sun. 

There is a zero sign of the Supreme; 

Nature left nude and still uncovers God. 

But in her grandiose nothingness all is there: 

When her strong garbs are torn away from us, 

The soul's ignorance is slain but not the soul: 

The zero covers an immortal face. 

A high and blank negation is not all, 

A huge extinction is not God's last word, 

Life's ultimate sense, the close of being's course, 

The meaning of this great mysterious world. 

In absolute silence sleeps an absolute Power. 

Awaking, it can wake the trance-bound soul</div>

<div class="page"><h3>312</h3>


And in the ray reveal the parent sun: 

It can make the world a vessel of Spirit's force, 

It can fashion in the clay God's perfect shape. 

To free the self is but one radiant pace; 

Here to fulfil himself was God's desire.

Even while he stood on being's naked edge 

And all the passion and seeking of his soul 

Faced their extinction in some featureless Vast, 

The Presence he yearned for suddenly drew close. 

Across the silence of the ultimate Calm, 

Out of a marvellous Transcendence' core, 

A body of wonder and translucency 

As if a sweet mystic summary of her self 

Escaping into the original Bliss 

Had come enlarged out of eternity, 

Someone came infinite and absolute. 

A being of wisdom, power and delight, 

Even as a mother draws her child to her arms, 

Took to her breast Nature and world and soul. 

Abolishing the signless emptiness, 

Breaking the vacancy and voiceless hush, 

Piercing the limitless Unknowable, 

Into the liberty of the motionless depths 

A beautiful and felicitous lustre stole. 

The Power, the Light, the Bliss no word can speak 

Imaged itself in a surprising beam 

And built a golden passage to his heart 

Touching through him all longing sentient things. 

A moment's sweetness of the All-Beautiful 

Cancelled the vanity of the cosmic whirl. 

A Nature throbbing with a Heart divine 

Was felt in the unconscious universe; 

It made the breath a happy mystery. 

A love that bore the cross of pain with joy 

Eudaemonised the sorrow of the world, </div>

<div class="page"><h3>313</h3>


Made happy the weight of long unending Time, 

The secret caught of God's felicity. 

Affirming in life a hidden ecstasy 

It held the spirit to its miraculous course; 

Carrying immortal values to the hours 

It justified the labour of the suns. 

For one was there supreme behind the God. 

A Mother Might brooded upon the world; 

A Consciousness revealed its marvellous front 

Transcending all that is, denying none: 

Imperishable above our fallen heads 

He felt a rapturous and unstumbling Force. 

The undying Truth appeared, the enduring Power 

Of all that here is made and then destroyed, 

The Mother of all godheads and all strengths 

Who, mediatrix, binds earth to the Supreme. 

The Enigma ceased that rules our nature's night, 

The covering Nescience was unmasked and slain; 

Its mind of error was stripped off from things 

And the dull moods of its perverting will. 

Illumined by her all-seeing identity 

Knowledge and Ignorance could strive no more; 

No longer could the titan Opposites, 

Antagonist poles of the world's artifice, 

Impose the illusion of their twofold screen 

Throwing their figures between us and her. 

The Wisdom was near, disguised by its own works, 

Of which the darkened universe is the robe. 

No more existence seemed an aimless fall, 

Extinction was no more the sole release. 

The hidden Word was found, the long-sought clue, 

Revealed was the meaning of our spirit's birth, 

Condemned to an imperfect body and mind, 

In the inconscience of material things 

And the indignity of mortal life. 

A Heart was felt in the spaces wide and bare,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>314</h3>


A burning Love from white spiritual founts 

Annulled the sorrow of the ignorant depths; 

Suffering was lost in her immortal smile. 

A Life from beyond grew conqueror here of death; 

To err no more was natural to mind; 

Wrong could not come where all was light and love. 

The Formless and the Formed were joined in her: 

Immensity was exceeded by a look, 

A Face revealed the crowded Infinite. 

Incarnating inexpressibly in her limbs 

The boundless joy the blind world-forces seek, 

Her body of beauty mooned the seas of bliss. 

At the head she stands of birth and toil and fate, 

In their slow round the cycles turn to her call; 

Alone her hands can change Time's dragon base. 

Hers is the mystery the Night conceals; 

The spirit's alchemist energy is hers; 

She is the golden bridge, the wonderful fire. 

The luminous heart of the Unknown is she, 

A power of silence in the depths of God; 

She is the Force, the inevitable Word, 

The magnet of our difficult ascent, 

The Sun from which we kindle all our suns, 

The Light that leans from the unrealised Vasts, 

The joy that beckons from the impossible, 

The Might of all that never yet came down. 

All Nature dumbly calls to her alone 

To heal with her feet the aching throb of life 

And break the seals on the dim soul of man 

And kindle her fire in the closed heart of things. 

All here shall be one day her sweetness' home, 

All contraries prepare her harmony; 

Towards her our knowledge climbs, our passion gropes; 

In her miraculous rapture we shall dwell, 

Her clasp shall turn to ecstasy our pain. 

Our self shall be one self with all through her.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>315</h3>


In her confirmed because transformed in her, 

Our life shall find in its fulfilled response 

Above, the boundless hushed beatitudes, 

Below, the wonder of the embrace divine. 

This known as in a thunder-flash of God, 

The rapture of things eternal filled his limbs; 

Amazement fell upon his ravished sense; 

His spirit was caught in her intolerant flame. 

Once seen, his heart acknowledged only her. 

Only a hunger of infinite bliss was left. 

All aims in her were lost, then found in her; 

His base was gathered to one pointing spire.

This was a seed cast into endless Time. 

A Word is spoken or a Light is shown, 

A moment sees, the ages toil to express. 

So flashing out of the Timeless leaped the worlds; 

An eternal instant is the cause of the years. 

All he had done was to prepare a field; 

His small beginnings asked for a mighty end: 

For all that he had been must now new-shape 

In him her joy to embody, to enshrine 

Her beauty and greatness in his house of life. 

But now his being was too wide for self; 

His heart's demand had grown immeasurable: 

His single freedom could not satisfy, 

Her light, her bliss he asked for earth and men. 

But vain are human power and human love 

To break earth's seal of ignorance and death; 

His nature's might seemed now an infant's grasp; 

Heaven is too high for outstretched hands to seize. 

This Light comes not by struggle or by thought; 

In the mind's silence the Transcendent acts 

And the hushed heart hears the unuttered Word. 

A vast surrender was his only strength. 

A Power that lives upon the heights must act, </div>

<div class="page"><h3>316</h3>


Bring into life's closed room the Immortal's air 

And fill the finite with the Infinite. 

All that denies must be torn out and slain 

And crushed the many longings for whose sake 

We lose the One for whom our lives were made. 

Now other claims had hushed in him their cry: 

Only he longed to draw her presence and power 

Into his heart and mind and breathing frame; 

Only he yearned to call for ever down 

Her healing touch of love and truth and joy 

Into the darkness of the suffering world. 

His soul was freed and given to her alone.</div>

