<h2>Book 2 Canto 1 - The Book of the Traveller of the Worlds - The World-Stair</h2>

<div class="page"><h3>95</h3>


Alone he moved watched by the infinity 

Around him and the Unknowable above. 

All could be seen that shuns the mortal eye, 

All could be known the mind has never grasped; 

All could be done no mortal will can dare. 

A limitless movement filled a limitless peace. 

In a profound existence beyond earth's 

Parent or kin to our ideas and dreams 

Where Space is a vast experiment of the soul, 

In an immaterial substance linked to ours 

In a deep oneness of all things that are, 

The universe of the Unknown arose. 

A self-creation without end or pause 

Revealed the grandeurs of the Infinite: 

It flung into the hazards of its play 

A million moods, a myriad energies, 

The world-shapes that are fancies of its Truth 

And the formulas of the freedom of its Force. 

It poured into the Ever-stable's flux 

A bacchic rapture and revel of Ideas, 

A passion and motion of everlastingness. 

There rose unborn into the Unchanging's surge 

Thoughts that abide in their deathless consequence, 

Words that immortal last though fallen mute, 

Acts that brought out from Silence its dumb sense, 

Lines that convey the inexpressible. 

The Eternal's stillness saw in unmoved joy 

His universal Power at work display 

In plots of pain and dramas of delight 

The wonder and beauty of her will to be. 

All, even pain, was the soul's pleasure here;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>96</h3>


Here all experience was a single plan, 

The thousandfold expression of the One. 

All came at once into his single view; 

Nothing escaped his vast intuitive sight, 

Nothing drew near he could not feel as kin: 

He was one spirit with that immensity. 

Images in a supernal consciousness 

Embodying the Unborn who never dies, 

The structured visions of the cosmic Self 

Alive with the touch of being's eternity 

Looked at him like form-bound spiritual thoughts 

Figuring the movements of the Ineffable. 

Aspects of being donned world-outline; forms 

That open moving doors on things divine, 

Became familiar to his hourly sight; 

The symbols of the Spirit's reality, 

The living bodies of the Bodiless 

Grew near to him, his daily associates. 

The exhaustless seeings of the unsleeping Mind, 

Letterings of its contact with the invisible, 

Surrounded him with countless pointing signs; 

The voices of a thousand realms of Life 

Missioned to him her mighty messages. 

The heaven-hints that invade our earthly lives, 

The dire imaginations dreamed by Hell, 

Which if enacted and experienced here 

Our dulled capacity soon would cease to feel 

Or our mortal frailty could not long endure, 

Were set in their sublime proportions there. 

There lived out in their self-born atmosphere, 

They resumed their topless pitch and native power; 

Their fortifying stress upon the soul 

Bit deep into the ground of consciousness 

The passion and purity of their extremes, 

The absoluteness of their single cry 

And the sovereign sweetness or violent poetry</div>

<div class="page"><h3>97</h3>


Of their beautiful or terrible delight. 

All thought can know or widest sight perceive 

And all that thought and sight can never know, 

All things occult and rare, remote and strange 

Were near to heart's contact, felt by spirit-sense. 

Asking for entry at his nature's gates 

They crowded the widened spaces of his mind, 

His self-discovery's flaming witnesses, 

Offering their marvel and their multitude. 

These now became new portions of himself, 

The figures of his spirit's greater life, 

The moving scenery of his large time-walk 

Or the embroidered tissue of his sense: 

These took the place of intimate human things 

And moved as close companions of his thoughts, 

Or were his soul's natural environment. 

Tireless the heart's adventure of delight, 

Endless the kingdoms of the Spirit's bliss, 

Unnumbered tones struck from one harmony's strings; 

Each to its wide-winged universal poise, 

Its fathomless feeling of the All in one, 

Brought notes of some perfection yet unseen, 

Its single retreat into Truth's secrecies, 

Its happy sidelight on the Infinite. 

All was found there the Unique has dreamed and made 

Tinging with ceaseless rapture and surprise 

And an opulent beauty of passionate difference 

The recurring beat that moments God in Time. 

Only was missing the sole timeless Word 

That carries eternity in its lonely sound, 

The Idea self-luminous key to all ideas, 

The integer of the Spirit's perfect sum 

That equates the unequal All to the equal One, 

The single sign interpreting every sign, 

The absolute index to the Absolute.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>98</h3>


There walled apart by its own innerness 

In a mystical barrage of dynamic light 

He saw a lone immense high-curved world-pile 

Erect like a mountain-chariot of the Gods 

Motionless under an inscrutable sky. 

As if from Matter's plinth and viewless base 

To a top as viewless, a carved sea of worlds 

Climbing with foam-maned waves to the Supreme 

Ascended towards breadths immeasurable; 

It hoped to soar into the Ineffable's reign: 

A hundred levels raised it to the Unknown. 

So it towered up to heights intangible 

And disappeared in the hushed conscious Vast 

As climbs a storeyed temple-tower to heaven 

Built by the aspiring soul of man to live 

Near to his dream of the Invisible. 

Infinity calls to it as it dreams and climbs; 

Its spire touches the apex of the world; 

Mounting into great voiceless stillnesses 

It marries the earth to screened eternities. 

Amid the many systems of the One 

Made by an interpreting creative joy 

Alone it points us to our journey back 

Out of our long self-loss in Nature's deeps; 

Planted on earth it holds in it all realms: 

It is a brief compendium of the Vast. 

This was the single stair to being's goal. 

A summary of the stages of the spirit, 

Its copy of the cosmic hierarchies 

Refashioned in our secret air of self 

A subtle pattern of the universe. 

It is within, below, without, above. 

Acting upon this visible Nature's scheme 

It wakens our earth-matter's heavy doze 

To think and feel and to react to joy; 

It models in us our diviner parts,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>99</h3>


Lifts mortal mind into a greater air, 

Makes yearn this life of flesh to intangible aims, 

Links the body's death with immortality's call: 

Out of the swoon of the Inconscience 

It labours towards a superconscient Light. 

If earth were all and this were not in her, 

Thought could not be nor life-delight's response: 

Only material forms could then be her guests 

Driven by an inanimate world-force. 

Earth by this golden superfluity 

Bore thinking man and more than man shall bear; 

This higher scheme of being is our cause 

And holds the key to our ascending fate; 

It calls out of our dense mortality 

The conscious spirit nursed in Matter's house. 

The living symbol of these conscious planes, 

Its influences and godheads of the unseen, 

Its unthought logic of Reality's acts 

Arisen from the unspoken truth in things, 

Have fixed our inner life's slow-scaled degrees. 

Its steps are paces of the soul's return 

From the deep adventure of material birth, 

A ladder of delivering ascent 

And rungs that Nature climbs to deity. 

Once in the vigil of a deathless gaze 

These grades had marked her giant downward plunge, 

The wide and prone leap of a godhead's fall. 

Our life is a holocaust of the Supreme. 

The great World-Mother by her sacrifice 

Has made her soul the body of our state; 

Accepting sorrow and unconsciousness 

Divinity's lapse from its own splendours wove 

The many-patterned ground of all we are. 

An idol of self is our mortality. 

Our earth is a fragment and a residue; 

Her power is packed with the stuff of greater worlds</div>

<div class="page"><h3>100</h3>


And steeped in their colour-lustres dimmed by her drowse; 

An atavism of higher births is hers, 

Her sleep is stirred by their buried memories 

Recalling the lost spheres from which they fell. 

Unsatisfied forces in her bosom move; 

They are partners of her greater growing fate 

And her return to immortality; 

They consent to share her doom of birth and death; 

They kindle partial gleams of the All and drive 

Her blind laborious spirit to compose 

A meagre image of the mighty Whole. 

The calm and luminous Intimacy within 

Approves her work and guides the unseeing Power. 

His vast design accepts a puny start. 

An attempt, a drawing half-done is the world's life; 

Its lines doubt their concealed significance, 

Its curves join not their high intended close. 

Yet some first image of greatness trembles there, 

And when the ambiguous crowded parts have met 

The many-toned unity to which they moved, 

The Artist's joy shall laugh at reason's rules; 

The divine intention suddenly shall be seen, 

The end vindicate intuition's sure technique. 

A graph shall be of many meeting worlds, 

A cube and union-crystal of the gods; 

A Mind shall think behind Nature's mindless mask, 

A conscious Vast fill the old dumb brute Space. 

This faint and fluid sketch of soul called man 

Shall stand out on the background of long Time 

A glowing epitome of eternity, 

A little point reveal the infinitudes. 

A Mystery's process is the universe. 

At first was laid a strange anomalous base, 

A void, a cipher of some secret Whole, 

Where zero held infinity in its sum 

And All and Nothing were a single term,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>101</h3>


An eternal negative, a matrix Nought: 

Into its forms the Child is ever born 

Who lives for ever in the vasts of God. 

A slow reversal's movement then took place: 

A gas belched out from some invisible Fire, 

Of its dense rings were formed these million stars; 

Upon earth's new-born soil God's tread was heard. 

Across the thick smoke of earth's ignorance 

A Mind began to see and look at forms 

And groped for knowledge in the nescient Night: 

Caught in a blind stone-grip Force worked its plan 

And made in sleep this huge mechanical world, 

That Matter might grow conscious of its soul 

And like a busy midwife the life-power 

Deliver the zero carrier of the All. 

Because eternal eyes turned on earth's gulfs 

The lucent clarity of a pure regard 

And saw a shadow of the Unknowable 

Mirrored in the Inconscient's boundless sleep, 

Creation's search for self began its stir. 

A spirit dreamed in the crude cosmic whirl, 

Mind flowed unknowing in the sap of life 

And Matter's breasts suckled the divine Idea. 

A miracle of the Absolute was born; 

Infinity put on a finite soul, 

All ocean lived within a wandering drop, 

A time-made body housed the Illimitable. 

To live this Mystery out our souls came here.

A Seer within who knows the ordered plan 

Concealed behind our momentary steps, 

Inspires our ascent to viewless heights 

As once the abysmal leap to earth and life. 

His call had reached the Traveller in Time. 

Apart in an unfathomed loneliness, 

He travelled in his mute and single strength </div>

<div class="page"><h3>102</h3>


Bearing the burden of the world's desire. 

A formless Stillness called, a nameless Light. 

Above him was the white immobile Ray, 

Around him the eternal Silences. 

No term was fixed to the high-pitched attempt; 

World after world disclosed its guarded powers, 

Heaven after heaven its deep beatitudes, 

But still the invisible Magnet drew his soul. 

A figure sole on Nature's giant stair, 

He mounted towards an indiscernible end 

On the bare summit of created things.</div>

