<h2>Book 11 Canto 1 - The Book of Everlasting Day - The Gospel of Death and Vanity of the Ideal</h2>

<div class="page"><h3>671</h3>


A marvellous sun looked down from ecstasy's skies 

On worlds of deathless bliss, perfection's home, 

Magical unfoldings of the Eternal's smile 

Capturing his secret heart-beats of delight. 

God's everlasting day surrounded her, 

Domains appeared of sempiternal light 

Invading all Nature with the Absolute's joy. 

Her body quivered with eternity's touch, 

Her soul stood close to the founts of the infinite. 

Infinity's finite fronts she lived in, new 

For ever to an everliving sight. 

Eternity multiplied its vast self-look 

Translating its endless mightiness and joy 

Into delight souls playing with Time could share 

In grandeurs ever new-born from the unknown depths, 

In powers that leaped immortal from unknown heights, 

In passionate heart-beats of an undying love, 

In scenes of a sweetness that can never fade. 

Immortal to the rapturous heart and eyes, 

In serene arches of translucent calm 

From Wonder's dream-vasts cloudless skies slid down 

An abyss of sapphire; sunlight visited eyes 

Which suffered without pain the absolute ray 

And saw immortal clarities of form. 

Twilight and mist were exiles from that air, 

Night was impossible to such radiant heavens. 

Firm in the bosom of immensity 

Spiritual breadths were seen, sublimely born 

From a still beauty of creative joy; 

Embodied thoughts to sweet dimensions held</div>

<div class="page"><h3>672</h3>


To please some carelessness of divine peace, 

Answered the deep demand of an infinite sense 

And its need of forms to house its bodiless thrill. 

A march of universal powers in Time, 

The harmonic order of self's vastitudes 

In cyclic symmetries and metric planes 

Harboured a cosmic rapture's revelry, 

An endless figuring of the spirit in things 

Planned by the artist who has dreamed the worlds; 

Of all the beauty and the marvel here, 

Of all Time's intricate variety 

Eternity was the substance and the source; 

Not from a plastic mist of Matter made, 

They offered the suggestion of their depths 

And opened the great series of their powers. 

Arisen beneath a triple mystic heaven 

The seven immortal earths were seen, sublime: 

Homes of the blest released from death and sleep 

Where grief can never come nor any pang 

Arriving from self-lost and seeking worlds 

Alter Heaven-nature's changeless quietude 

And mighty posture of eternal calm, 

Its pose of ecstasy immutable. 

Plains lay that seemed the expanse of God's wide sleep, 

Thought's wings climbed up towards heaven's vast repose 

Lost in blue deeps of immortality. 

A changed earth-nature felt the breath of peace. 

Air seemed an ocean of felicity 

Or the couch of the unknown spiritual rest, 

A vast quiescence swallowing up all sound 

Into a voicelessness of utter bliss; 

Even Matter brought a close spiritual touch, 

All thrilled with the immanence of one divine. 

The lowest of these earths was still a heaven 

Translating into the splendour of things divine 

The beauty and brightness of terrestrial scenes.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>673</h3>


Eternal mountains ridge on gleaming ridge 

Whose lines were graved as on a sapphire plate 

And etched the borders of heaven's lustrous noon 

Climbed like piled temple stairs and from their heads 

Of topless meditation heard below 

The approach of a blue pilgrim multitude 

And listened to a great arriving voice 

Of the wide travel hymn of timeless seas. 

A chanting crowd from mountain bosoms slipped 

Past branches fragrant with a sigh of flowers 

Hurrying through sweetnesses with revel leaps; 

The murmurous rivers of felicity 

Divinely rippled honey-voiced desires, 

Mingling their sister eddies of delight, 

Then, widening to a pace of calm-lipped muse, 

Down many-glimmered estuaries of dream 

Went whispering into lakes of liquid peace. 

On a brink held of senseless ecstasy 

And guarding an eternal poise of thought 

Sat sculptured souls dreaming by rivers of sound 

In changeless attitudes of marble bliss. 

Around her lived the children of God's day 

In an unspeakable felicity, 

A happiness never lost, the immortal's ease, 

A glad eternity's blissful multitude. 

Around, the deathless nations moved and spoke, 

Souls of a luminous celestial joy, 

Faces of stark beauty, limbs of the moulded Ray; 

In cities cut like gems of conscious stone 

And wonderful pastures and on gleaming coasts 

Bright forms were seen, eternity's luminous tribes. 

Above her rhythming godheads whirled the spheres, 

Rapt mobile fixities here blindly sought 

By the huge erring orbits of our stars. 

Ecstatic voices smote at hearing's chords, 

Each movement found a music all its own;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>674</h3>


Songs thrilled of birds upon unfading boughs 

The colours of whose plumage had been caught 

From the rainbow of imagination's wings. 

Immortal fragrance packed the quivering breeze. 

In groves that seemed moved bosoms and trembling depths 

The million children of the undying spring 

Bloomed, pure unnumbered stars of hued delight 

Nestling for shelter in their emerald sky: 

Faery flower-masses looked with laughing eyes. 

A dancing chaos, an iridescent sea 

Eternised to Heaven's ever-wakeful sight 

The crowding petal-glow of marvel's tints 

Which float across the curtained lids of dream. 

Immortal harmonies filled her listening ear; 

A great spontaneous utterance of the heights 

On Titan wings of rhythmic grandeur borne 

Poured from some deep spiritual heart of sound, 

Strains trembling with the secrets of the gods. 

A spirit wandered happily in the wind, 

A spirit brooded in the leaf and stone; 

The voices of thought-conscious instruments 

Along a living verge of silence strayed, 

And from some deep, a wordless tongue of things 

Unfathomed, inexpressible, chantings rose 

Translating into a voice the Unknown. 

A climber on the invisible stair of sound, 

Music not with these few and striving steps 

Aspired that wander upon transient strings, 

But changed its ever new uncounted notes 

In a passion of unforeseeing discovery, 

And kept its old unforgotten ecstasies 

A growing treasure in the mystic heart. 

A consciousness that yearned through every cry 

Of unexplored attraction and desire, 

It found and searched again the unsatisfied deeps 

Hunting as if in some deep secret heart</div>

<div class="page"><h3>675</h3>


To find some lost or missed felicity. 

In those far-lapsing symphonies she could hear, 

Breaking through enchantments of the ravished sense, 

The lyric voyage of a divine soul 

Mid spume and laughter tempting with its prow 

The charm of innocent Circean isles, 

Adventures without danger beautiful 

In lands where siren Wonder sings its lures 

From rhythmic rocks in ever-foaming seas. 

In the harmony of an original sight 

Delivered from our limiting ray of thought, 

And the reluctance of our blinded hearts 

To embrace the Godhead in whatever guise, 

She saw all Nature marvellous without fault. 

Invaded by beauty's universal revel 

Her being's fibre reached out vibrating 

And claimed deep union with its outer selves, 

And on the heart's chords made pure to seize all tones 

Heaven's subtleties of touch unwearying forced 

More vivid raptures than earth's life can bear. 

What would be suffering here, was fiery bliss. 

All here but passionate hint and mystic shade 

Divined by the inner prophet who perceives 

The spirit of delight in sensuous things, 

Turned to more sweetness than can now be dreamed. 

The mighty signs of which earth fears the stress, 

Trembling because she cannot understand, 

And must keep obscure in forms strange and sublime, 

Were here the first lexicon of an infinite mind 

Translating the language of eternal bliss. 

Here rapture was a common incident; 

The lovelinesses of whose captured thrill 

Our human pleasure is a fallen thread, 

Lay, symbol shapes, a careless ornament, 

Sewn on the rich brocade of Godhead's dress. 

Things fashioned were the imaged homes where mind</div>

<div class="page"><h3>676</h3>


Arrived to fathom a deep physical joy; 

The heart was a torch lit from infinity, 

The limbs were trembling densities of soul. 

These were the first domains, the outer courts 

Immense but least in range and least in price, 

The slightest ecstasies of the undying gods. 

Higher her swing of vision swept and knew, 

Admitted through large sapphire opening gates 

Into the wideness of a light beyond, 

These were but sumptuous decorated doors 

To worlds nobler, more felicitously fair. 

Endless aspired the climbing of those heavens; 

Realm upon realm received her soaring view. 

Then on what seemed one crown of the ascent 

Where finite and the infinite are one, 

Immune she beheld the strong immortals' seats 

Who live for a celestial joy and rule, 

The middle regions of the unfading Ray. 

Great forms of deities sat in deathless tiers, 

Eyes of an unborn gaze towards her leaned 

Through a transparency of crystal fire. 

In the beauty of bodies wrought from rapture's lines, 

Shapes of entrancing sweetness spilling bliss, 

Feet glimmering upon the sunstone courts of mind, 

Heaven's cupbearers bore round the Eternal's wine. 

A tangle of bright bodies, of moved souls 

Tracing the close and intertwined delight, 

The harmonious tread of lives for ever joined 

In the passionate oneness of a mystic joy 

As if sunbeams made living and divine, 

The golden-bosomed Apsara goddesses, 

In groves flooded from an argent disk of bliss 

That floated through a luminous sapphire dream, 

In a cloud of raiment lit with golden limbs 

And gleaming footfalls treading faery swards, 

Virgin motions of bacchant innocences</div>

<div class="page"><h3>677</h3>


Who know their riot for a dance of God, 

Whirled linked in moonlit revels of the heart. 

Impeccable artists of unerring forms, 

Magician builders of sound and rhythmic words, 

Wind-haired Gandharvas chanted to the ear 

The odes that shape the universal thought, 

The lines that tear the veil from Deity's face, 

The rhythms that bring the sounds of wisdom's sea. 

Immortal figures and illumined brows, 

Our great forefathers in those splendours moved; 

Termless in power and satisfied of light, 

They enjoyed the sense of all for which we strive. 

High seers, moved poets saw the eternal thoughts 

That, travellers from on high, arrive to us 

Deformed by our search, tricked by costuming mind, 

Like gods disfigured by the pangs of birth, 

Seized the great words which now are frail sounds caught 

By difficult rapture on a mortal tongue. 

The strong who stumble and sin were calm proud gods. 

There lightning-filled with glory and with flame, 

Melting in waves of sympathy and sight, 

Smitten like a lyre that throbs to others' bliss, 

Drawn by the cords of ecstasies unknown, 

Her human nature faint with heaven's delight, 

She beheld the clasp to earth denied and bore 

The imperishable eyes of veilless love. 

More climbed above, level to level reached, 

Beyond what tongue can utter or mind dream: 

Worlds of an infinite reach crowned Nature's stir. 

There was a greater tranquil sweetness there, 

A subtler and profounder ether's field 

And mightier scheme than heavenliest sense can give. 

There breath carried a stream of seeing mind, 

Form was a tenuous raiment of the soul: 

Colour was a visible tone of ecstasy; 

Shapes seen half immaterial by the gaze</div>

<div class="page"><h3>678</h3>


And yet voluptuously palpable 

Made sensible to touch the indwelling spirit. 

The high perfected sense illumined lived 

A happy vassal of the inner ray, 

Each feeling was the Eternal's mighty child 

And every thought was a sweet burning god. 

Air was a luminous feeling, sound a voice, 

Sunlight the soul's vision and moonlight its dream. 

On a wide living base of wordless calm 

All was a potent and a lucid joy. 

Into those heights her spirit went floating up 

Like an upsoaring bird who mounts unseen 

Voicing to the ascent his throbbing heart 

Of melody till a pause of closing wings 

Comes quivering in his last contented cry 

And he is silent with his soul discharged, 

Delivered of his heart's burden of delight. 

Experience mounted on joy's coloured breast 

To inaccessible spheres in spiral flight. 

There Time dwelt with eternity as one; 

Immense felicity joined rapt repose.

As one drowned in a sea of splendour and bliss, 

Mute in the maze of these surprising worlds, 

Turning she saw their living knot and source, 

Key to their charm and fount of their delight, 

And knew him for the same who snares our lives 

Captured in his terrifying pitiless net, 

And makes the universe his prison camp 

And makes in his immense and vacant vasts 

The labour of the stars a circuit vain 

And death the end of every human road 

And grief and pain the wages of man's toil. 

One whom her soul had faced as Death and Night 

A sum of all sweetness gathered into his limbs 

And blinded her heart to the beauty of the suns.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>679</h3>


Transfigured was the formidable shape. 

His darkness and his sad destroying might 

Abolishing for ever and disclosing 

The mystery of his high and violent deeds, 

A secret splendour rose revealed to sight 

Where once the vast embodied Void had stood. 

Night the dim mask had grown a wonderful face. 

The vague infinity was slain whose gloom 

Had outlined from the terrible unknown 

The obscure disastrous figure of a god, 

Fled was the error that arms the hands of grief, 

And lighted the ignorant gulf whose hollow deeps 

Had given to nothingness a dreadful voice. 

As when before the eye that wakes in sleep 

Is opened the sombre binding of a book, 

Illumined letterings are seen which kept 

A golden blaze of thought inscribed within, 

A marvellous form responded to her gaze 

Whose sweetness justified life's blindest pain; 

All Nature's struggle was its easy price, 

The universe and its agony seemed worth while. 

As if the choric calyx of a flower 

Aerial, visible on music's waves, 

A lotus of light-petalled ecstasy 

Took shape out of the tremulous heart of things. 

There was no more the torment under the stars, 

The evil sheltered behind Nature's mask; 

There was no more the dark pretence of hate, 

The cruel rictus on Love's altered face. 

Hate was the grip of a dreadful amour's strife; 

A ruthless love intent only to possess 

Has here replaced the sweet original god. 

Forgetting the Will-to-love that gave it birth, 

The passion to lock itself in and to unite, 

It would swallow all into one lonely self, 

Devouring the soul that it had made its own,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>680</h3>


By suffering and annihilation's pain 

Punishing the unwillingness to be one, 

Angry with the refusals of the world, 

Passionate to take but knowing not how to give. 

Death's sombre cowl was cast from Nature's brow; 

There lightened on her the godhead's lurking laugh. 

All grace and glory and all divinity 

Were here collected in a single form; 

All worshipped eyes looked through his from one face; 

He bore all godheads in his grandiose limbs. 

An oceanic spirit dwelt within; 

Intolerant and invincible in joy 

A flood of freedom and transcendent bliss 

Into immortal lines of beauty rose. 

In him the fourfold Being bore its crown 

That wears the mystery of a nameless Name, 

The universe writing its tremendous sense 

In the inexhaustible meaning of a word. 

In him the architect of the visible world, 

At once the art and artist of his works, 

Spirit and seer and thinker of things seen, 

Virat, who lights his camp-fires in the suns 

And the star-entangled ether is his hold, 

Expressed himself with Matter for his speech: 

Objects are his letters, forces are his words, 

Events are the crowded history of his life, 

And sea and land are the pages for his tale. 

Matter is his means and his spiritual sign; 

He hangs the thought upon a lash's lift, 

In the current of the blood makes flow the soul. 

His is the dumb will of atom and of clod; 

A Will that without sense or motive acts, 

An Intelligence needing not to think or plan, 

The world creates itself invincibly; 

For its body is the body of the Lord 

And in its heart stands Virat, King of Kings.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>681</h3>


In him shadows his form the Golden Child 

Who in the Sun-capped Vast cradles his birth: 

Hiranyagarbha, author of thoughts and dreams, 

Who sees the invisible and hears the sounds 

That never visited a mortal ear, 

Discoverer of unthought realities 

Truer to Truth than all we have ever known, 

He is the leader on the inner roads; 

A seer, he has entered the forbidden realms; 

A magician with the omnipotent wand of thought, 

He builds the secret uncreated worlds. 

Armed with the golden speech, the diamond eye, 

His is the vision and the prophecy: 

Imagist casting the formless into shape, 

Traveller and hewer of the unseen paths, 

He is the carrier of the hidden fire, 

He is the voice of the Ineffable, 

He is the invisible hunter of the light, 

The Angel of mysterious ecstasies, 

The conqueror of the kingdoms of the soul. 

A third spirit stood behind, their hidden cause, 

A mass of superconscience closed in light, 

Creator of things in his all-knowing sleep. 

All from his stillness came as grows a tree; 

He is our seed and core, our head and base. 

All light is but a flash from his closed eyes: 

An all-wise Truth is mystic in his heart, 

The omniscient Ray is shut behind his lids: 

He is the Wisdom that comes not by thought, 

His wordless silence brings the immortal word. 

He sleeps in the atom and the burning star, 

He sleeps in man and god and beast and stone: 

Because he is there the Inconscient does its work, 

Because he is there the world forgets to die. 

He is the centre of the circle of God, 

He the circumference of Nature's run.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>682</h3>


His slumber is an Almightiness in things, 

Awake, he is the Eternal and Supreme. 

Above was the brooding bliss of the Infinite, 

Its omniscient and omnipotent repose, 

Its immobile silence absolute and alone. 

All powers were woven in countless concords here. 

The bliss that made the world in his body lived, 

Love and delight were the head of the sweet form. 

In the alluring meshes of their snare 

Recaptured, the proud blissful members held 

All joys outrunners of the panting heart 

And fugitive from life's outstripped desire. 

Whatever vision has escaped the eye, 

Whatever happiness comes in dream and trance, 

The nectar spilled by love with trembling hands, 

The joy the cup of Nature cannot hold, 

Had crowded to the beauty of his face, 

Were waiting in the honey of his laugh. 

Things hidden by the silence of the hours, 

The ideas that find no voice on living lips, 

The soul's pregnant meeting with infinity 

Had come to birth in him and taken fire: 

The secret whisper of the flower and star 

Revealed its meaning in his fathomless look. 

His lips curved eloquent like a rose of dawn; 

His smile that played with the wonder of the mind 

And stayed in the heart when it had left his mouth 

Glimmered with the radiance of the morning star 

Gemming the wide discovery of heaven. 

His gaze was the regard of eternity; 

The spirit of its sweet and calm intent 

Was a wise home of gladness and divulged 

The light of the ages in the mirth of the hours, 

A sun of wisdom in a miracled grove. 

In the orchestral largeness of his mind 

All contrary seekings their close kinship knew,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>683</h3>


Rich-hearted, wonderful to each other met 

In the mutual marvelling of their myriad notes 

And dwelt like brothers of one family 

Who had found their common and mysterious home. 

As from the harp of some ecstatic god 

There springs a harmony of lyric bliss 

Striving to leave no heavenly joy unsung, 

Such was the life in that embodied Light. 

He seemed the wideness of a boundless sky, 

He seemed the passion of a sorrowless earth, 

He seemed the burning of a world-wide sun. 

Two looked upon each other, Soul saw Soul.

Then like an anthem from the heart's lucent cave 

A voice soared up whose magic sound could turn 

The poignant weeping of the earth to sobs 

Of rapture and her cry to spirit song. 

&amp;O human image of the deathless word, 

How hast thou seen beyond the topaz walls 

The gleaming sisters of the divine gate, 

Summoned the genii of their wakeful sleep, 

And under revelation's arches forced 

The carved thought-shrouded doors to swing apart, 

Unlocked the avenues of spiritual sight 

And taught the entries of a heavenlier state 

To thy rapt soul that bore the golden key? 

In thee the secret sight man's blindness missed 

Has opened its view past Time, my chariot-course, 

And death, my tunnel which I drive through life 

To reach my unseen distances of bliss. 

I am the hushed search of the jealous gods 

Pursuing my wisdom's vast mysterious work 

Seized in the thousand meeting ways of heaven. 

I am the beauty of the unveiled ray 

Drawing through the deep roads of the infinite night 

The unconquerable pilgrim soul of earth</div>

<div class="page"><h3>684</h3>


Beneath the flaring torches of the stars. 

I am the inviolable Ecstasy; 

They who have looked on me, shall grieve no more. 

The eyes that live in night shall see my form. 

On the pale shores of foaming steely straits 

That flow beneath a grey tormented sky, 

Two powers from one original ecstasy born 

Pace near but parted in the life of man; 

One leans to earth, the other yearns to the skies: 

Heaven in its rapture dreams of perfect earth, 

Earth in its sorrow dreams of perfect heaven. 

The two longing to join, yet walk apart, 

Idly divided by their vain conceits; 

They are kept from their oneness by enchanted fears; 

Sundered mysteriously by miles of thought, 

They gaze across the silent gulfs of sleep. 

Or side by side reclined upon my vasts 

Like bride and bridegroom magically divorced 

They wake to yearn, but never can they clasp 

While thinly flickering hesitates uncrossed 

Between the lovers on their nuptial couch 

The shadowy eidolon of a sword. 

But when the phantom flame-edge fails undone, 

Then never more can space or time divide 

The lover from the loved; Space shall draw back 

Her great translucent curtain, Time shall be 

The quivering of the spirit's endless bliss. 

Attend that moment of celestial fate. 

Meanwhile you two shall serve the dual law 

Which only now the scouts of vision glimpse 

Who pressing through the forest of their thoughts 

Have found the narrow bridges of the gods. 

Wait patient of the brittle bars of form 

Making division your delightful means 

Of happy oneness rapturously enhanced 

By attraction in the throbbing air between.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>685</h3>


Yet if thou wouldst abandon the vexed world, 

Careless of the dark moan of things below, 

Tread down the isthmus, overleap the flood, 

Cancel thy contract with the labouring Force; 

Renounce the tie that joins thee to earth-kind, 

Cast off thy sympathy with mortal hearts. 

Arise, vindicate thy spirit's conquered right: 

Relinquishing thy charge of transient breath, 

Under the cold gaze of the indifferent stars 

Leaving thy borrowed body on the sod, 

Ascend, O soul, into thy blissful home. 

Here in the playground of the eternal Child 

Or in domains the wise Immortals tread 

Roam with thy comrade splendour under skies 

Spiritual lit by an unsetting sun, 

As godheads live who care not for the world 

And share not in the toil of Nature's powers: 

Absorbed in their self-ecstasy they dwell. 

Cast off the ambiguous myth of earth's desire, 

O immortal, to felicity arise.&amp; 

On Savitri listening in her tranquil heart 

To the harmony of the ensnaring voice 

A joy exceeding earth's and heaven's poured down, 

The bliss of an unknown eternity, 

A rapture from some waiting Infinite. 

A smile came rippling out in her wide eyes, 

Its confident felicity's messenger 

As if the first beam of the morning sun 

Rippled along two wakened lotus-pools. 

&amp;O besetter of man's soul with life and death 

And the world's pleasure and pain and Day and Night, 

Tempting his heart with the far lure of heaven, 

Testing his strength with the close touch of hell, 

I climb not to thy everlasting Day, 

Even as I have shunned thy eternal Night. 

To me who turn not from thy terrestrial Way,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>686</h3>


Give back the other self my nature asks. 

Thy spaces need him not to help their joy; 

Earth needs his beautiful spirit made by thee 

To fling delight down like a net of gold. 

Earth is the chosen place of mightiest souls; 

Earth is the heroic spirit's battlefield, 

The forge where the Archmason shapes his works. 

Thy servitudes on earth are greater, King, 

Than all the glorious liberties of heaven. 

The heavens were once to me my natural home, 

I too have wandered in star-jewelled groves, 

Paced sun-gold pastures and moon-silver swards 

And heard the harping laughter of their streams 

And lingered under branches dropping myrrh; 

I too have revelled in the fields of light 

Touched by the ethereal raiment of the winds, 

Thy wonder-rounds of music I have trod, 

Lived in the rhyme of bright unlabouring thoughts, 

I have beat swift harmonies of rapture vast, 

Danced in spontaneous measures of the soul 

The great and easy dances of the gods. 

O fragrant are the lanes thy children walk 

And lovely is the memory of their feet 

Amid the wonder-flowers of Paradise: 

A heavier tread is mine, a mightier touch. 

There where the gods and demons battle in night 

Or wrestle on the borders of the Sun, 

Taught by the sweetness and the pain of life 

To bear the uneven strenuous beat that throbs 

Against the edge of some divinest hope, 

To dare the impossible with these pangs of search, 

In me the spirit of immortal love 

Stretches its arms out to embrace mankind. 

Too far thy heavens for me from suffering men. 

Imperfect is the joy not shared by all. 

O to spread forth, O to encircle and seize</div>

<div class="page"><h3>687</h3>


More hearts till love in us has filled thy world! 

O life, the life beneath the wheeling stars! 

For victory in the tournament with death, 

For bending of the fierce and difficult bow, 

For flashing of the splendid sword of God! 

O thou who soundst the trumpet in the lists, 

Part not the handle from the untried steel, 

Take not the warrior with his blow unstruck. 

Are there not still a million fights to wage? 

O king-smith, clang on still thy toil begun, 

Weld us to one in thy strong smithy of life. 

Thy fine-curved jewelled hilt call Savitri, 

Thy blade's exultant smile name Satyavan. 

Fashion to beauty, point us through the world. 

Break not the lyre before the song is found; 

Are there not still unnumbered chants to weave? 

O subtle-souled musician of the years, 

Play out what thou hast fluted on my stops; 

Arise from the strain their first wild plaint divined 

And that discover which is yet unsung. 

I know that I can lift man's soul to God, 

I know that he can bring the Immortal down. 

Our will labours permitted by thy will 

And without thee an empty roar of storm, 

A senseless whirlwind is the Titan's force 

And without thee a snare the strength of gods. 

Let not the inconscient gulf swallow man's race 

That through earth's ignorance struggles towards thy Light. 

O Thunderer with the lightnings of the soul, 

Give not to darkness and to death thy sun, 

Achieve thy wisdom's hidden firm decree 

And the mandate of thy secret world-wide love.&amp; 

Her words failed lost in thought's immensities 

Which seized them at the limits of their cry 

And hid their meaning in the distances 

That stir to more than ever speech has won</div>

<div class="page"><h3>688</h3>


From the Unthinkable, end of all our thought, 

And the Ineffable from whom all words come.

Then with a smile august as noonday heavens 

The godhead of the vision wonderful: 

&amp;How shall earth-nature and man's nature rise 

To the celestial levels, yet earth abide? 

Heaven and earth towards each other gaze 

Across a gulf that few can cross, none touch, 

Arriving through a vague ethereal mist 

Out of which all things form that move in space, 

The shore that all can see but never reach. 

Heaven's light visits sometimes the mind of earth; 

Its thoughts burn in her sky like lonely stars; 

In her heart there move celestial seekings soft 

And beautiful like fluttering wings of birds, 

Visions of joy that she can never win 

Traverse the fading mirror of her dreams. 

Faint seeds of light and bliss bear sorrowful flowers, 

Faint harmonies caught from a half-heard song 

Fall swooning mid the wandering voices' jar, 

Foam from the tossing luminous seas where dwells 

The beautiful and far delight of gods, 

Raptures unknown, a miracled happiness 

Thrill her and pass half-shaped to mind and sense. 

Above her little finite steps she feels, 

Careless of knot or pause, worlds which weave out 

A strange perfection beyond law and rule, 

A universe of self-found felicity, 

An inexpressible rhythm of timeless beats, 

The many-movemented heart-beats of the One, 

Magic of the boundless harmonies of self, 

Order of the freedom of the infinite, 

The wonder-plastics of the Absolute. 

There is the All-Truth and there the timeless bliss. 

But hers are fragments of a star-lost gleam,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>689</h3>


Hers are but careless visits of the gods. 

They are a Light that fails, a Word soon hushed 

And nothing they mean can stay for long on earth. 

There are high glimpses, not the lasting sight. 

A few can climb to an unperishing sun, 

Or live on the edges of the mystic moon 

And channel to earth-mind the wizard ray. 

The heroes and the demigods are few 

To whom the close immortal voices speak 

And to their acts the heavenly clan are near. 

Few are the silences in which Truth is heard, 

Unveiling the timeless utterance in her deeps; 

Few are the splendid moments of the seers. 

Heaven's call is rare, rarer the heart that heeds; 

The doors of light are sealed to common mind 

And earth's needs nail to earth the human mass, 

Only in an uplifting hour of stress 

Men answer to the touch of greater things: 

Or, raised by some strong hand to breathe heaven-air, 

They slide back to the mud from which they climbed; 

In the mud of which they are made, whose law they know 

They joy in safe return to a friendly base, 

And, though something in them weeps for glory lost 

And greatness murdered, they accept their fall. 

To be the common man they think the best, 

To live as others live is their delight. 

For most are built on Nature's early plan 

And owe small debt to a superior plane; 

The human average is their level pitch, 

A thinking animal's material range. 

In the long ever-mounting hierarchy, 

In the stark economy of cosmic life 

Each creature to its appointed task and place 

Is bound by his nature's form, his spirit's force. 

If this were easily disturbed, it would break 

The settled balance of created things;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>690</h3>


The perpetual order of the universe 

Would tremble, and a gap yawn in woven Fate. 

If men were not and all were brilliant gods, 

The mediating stair would then be lost 

By which the spirit awake in Matter winds 

Accepting the circuits of the middle Way, 

By heavy toil and slow aeonic steps 

Reaching the bright miraculous fringe of God, 

Into the glory of the Oversoul. 

My will, my call is there in men and things; 

But the Inconscient lies at the world's grey back 

And draws to its breast of Night and Death and Sleep. 

Imprisoned in its dark and dumb abyss 

A little consciousness it lets escape 

But jealous of the growing light holds back 

Close to the obscure edges of its cave 

As if a fond ignorant mother kept her child 

Tied to her apron strings of Nescience. 

The Inconscient could not read without man's mind 

The mystery of the world its sleep has made: 

Man is its key to unlock a conscious door. 

But still it holds him dangled in its grasp: 

It draws its giant circle round his thoughts, 

It shuts his heart to the supernal Light. 

A high and dazzling limit shines above, 

A black and blinding border rules below: 

His mind is closed between two firmaments. 

He seeks through words and images the Truth, 

And, poring on surfaces and brute outsides 

Or dipping cautious feet in shallow seas, 

Even his Knowledge is an Ignorance. 

He is barred out from his own inner depths; 

He cannot look on the face of the Unknown. 

How shall he see with the Omniscient's eyes, 

How shall he will with the Omnipotent's force? 

O too compassionate and eager Dawn,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>691</h3>


Leave to the circling aeons' tardy pace 

And to the working of the inconscient Will, 

Leave to its imperfect light the earthly race: 

All shall be done by the long act of Time. 

Although the race is bound by its own kind, 

The soul in man is greater than his fate: 

Above the wash and surge of Time and Space, 

Disengaging from the cosmic commonalty 

By which all life is kin in grief and joy, 

Delivered from the universal Law 

The sunlike single and transcendent spirit 

Can blaze its way through the mind's barrier wall 

And burn alone in the eternal sky, 

Inhabitant of a wide and endless calm. 

O flame, withdraw into thy luminous self. 

Or else return to thy original might 

On a seer-summit above thought and world; 

Partner of my unhoured eternity, 

Be one with the infinity of my power: 

For thou art the World-Mother and the Bride. 

Out of the fruitless yearning of earth's life, 

Out of her feeble unconvincing dream, 

Recovering wings that cross infinity 

Pass back into the Power from which thou cam'st. 

To that thou canst uplift thy formless flight, 

Thy heart can rise from its unsatisfied beats 

And feel the immortal and spiritual joy 

Of a soul that never lost felicity. 

Lift up the fallen heart of love which flutters 

Cast down desire's abyss into the gulfs. 

For ever rescued out of Nature's shapes 

Discover what the aimless cycles want, 

There intertwined with all thy life has meant, 

Here vainly sought in a terrestrial form. 

Break into eternity thy mortal mould; 

Melt, lightning, into thy invisible flame!</div>

<div class="page"><h3>692</h3>


Clasp, Ocean, deep into thyself thy wave, 

Happy for ever in the embosoming surge. 

Grow one with the still passion of the depths. 

Then shalt thou know the Lover and the Loved, 

Leaving the limits dividing him and thee. 

Receive him into boundless Savitri, 

Lose thyself into infinite Satyavan. 

O miracle, where thou beganst, there cease!&amp; 

But Savitri answered to the radiant God: 

&amp;In vain thou temptst with solitary bliss 

Two spirits saved out of a suffering world; 

My soul and his indissolubly linked 

In the one task for which our lives were born, 

To raise the world to God in deathless Light, 

To bring God down to the world on earth we came, 

To change the earthly life to life divine. 

I keep my will to save the world and man; 

Even the charm of thy alluring voice, 

O blissful Godhead, cannot seize and snare. 

I sacrifice not earth to happier worlds. 

Because there dwelt the Eternal's vast Idea 

And his dynamic will in men and things, 

So only could the enormous scene begin. 

Whence came this profitless wilderness of stars, 

This mighty barren wheeling of the suns? 

Who made the soul of futile life in Time, 

Planted a purpose and a hope in the heart, 

Set Nature to a huge and meaningless task 

Or planned her million-aeoned effort's waste? 

What force condemned to birth and death and tears 

These conscious creatures crawling on the globe? 

If earth can look up to the light of heaven 

And hear an answer to her lonely cry, 

Not vain their meeting, nor heaven's touch a snare. 

If thou and I are true, the world is true; 

Although thou hide thyself behind thy works,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>693</h3>


To be is not a senseless paradox; 

Since God has made earth, earth must make in her God; 

What hides within her breast she must reveal. 

I claim thee for the world that thou hast made. 

If man lives bound by his humanity, 

If he is tied for ever to his pain, 

Let a greater being then arise from man, 

The superhuman with the Eternal mate 

And the Immortal shine through earthly forms. 

Else were creation vain and this great world 

A nothing that in Time's moments seems to be. 

But I have seen through the insentient mask; 

I have felt a secret spirit stir in things 

Carrying the body of the growing God: 

It looks through veiling forms at veilless truth; 

It pushes back the curtain of the gods; 

It climbs towards its own eternity.&amp; 

But the god answered to the woman's heart: 

&amp;O living power of the incarnate Word, 

All that the Spirit has dreamed thou canst create: 

Thou art the force by which I made the worlds, 

Thou art my vision and my will and voice. 

But knowledge too is thine, the world-plan thou knowest 

And the tardy process of the pace of Time. 

In the impetuous drive of thy heart of flame, 

In thy passion to deliver man and earth, 

Indignant at the impediments of Time 

And the slow evolution's sluggard steps, 

Lead not the spirit in an ignorant world 

To dare too soon the adventure of the Light, 

Pushing the bound and slumbering god in man 

Awakened mid the ineffable silences 

Into endless vistas of the unknown and unseen, 

Across the last confines of the limiting Mind 

And the Superconscient's perilous border line 

Into the danger of the Infinite.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>694</h3>


But if thou wilt not wait for Time and God, 

Do then thy work and force thy will on Fate. 

As I have taken from thee my load of night 

And taken from thee my twilight's doubts and dreams, 

So now I take my light of utter Day. 

These are my symbol kingdoms but not here 

Can the great choice be made that fixes fate 

Or uttered the sanction of the Voice supreme. 

Arise upon a ladder of greater worlds 

To the infinity where no world can be. 

But not in the wide air where a greater Life 

Uplifts its mystery and its miracle, 

And not on the luminous peaks of summit Mind, 

Or in the hold where subtle Matter's spirit 

Hides in its light of shimmering secrecies, 

Can there be heard the Eternal's firm command 

That joins the head of destiny to its base. 

These only are the mediating links; 

Not theirs is the originating sight 

Nor the fulfilling act or last support 

That bears perpetually the cosmic pile. 

Two are the Powers that hold the ends of Time; 

Spirit foresees, Matter unfolds its thought, 

The dumb executor of God's decrees, 

Omitting no iota and no dot, 

Agent unquestioning, inconscient, stark, 

Evolving inevitably a charged content, 

Intention of his force in Time and Space, 

In animate beings and inanimate things; 

Immutably it fulfils its ordered task, 

It cancels not a tittle of things done; 

Unswerving from the oracular command 

It alters not the steps of the Unseen. 

If thou must indeed deliver man and earth 

On the spiritual heights look down on life, 

Discover the truth of God and man and world;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>695</h3>


Then do thy task knowing and seeing all. 

Ascend, O soul, into thy timeless self; 

Choose destiny's curve and stamp thy will on Time.&amp; 

He ended and upon the falling sound 

A power went forth that shook the founded spheres 

And loosed the stakes that hold the tents of form. 

Absolved from vision's grip and the folds of thought, 

Rapt from her sense like disappearing scenes 

In the stupendous theatre of Space 

The heaven-worlds vanished in spiritual light. 

A movement was abroad, a cry, a word, 

Beginningless in its vast discovery, 

Momentless in its unthinkable return: 

Choired in calm seas she heard the eternal Thought 

Rhythming itself abroad unutterably 

In spaceless orbits and on timeless roads. 

In an ineffable world she lived fulfilled. 

An energy of the triune Infinite, 

In a measureless Reality she dwelt, 

A rapture and a being and a force, 

A linked and myriad-motioned plenitude, 

A virgin unity, a luminous spouse, 

Housing a multitudinous embrace 

To marry all in God's immense delight, 

Bearing the eternity of every spirit, 

Bearing the burden of universal love, 

A wonderful mother of unnumbered souls. 

All things she knew, all things imagined or willed: 

Her ear was opened to ideal sound, 

Shape the convention bound no more her sight, 

A thousand doors of oneness was her heart. 

A crypt and sanctuary of brooding light 

Appeared, the last recess of things beyond. 

Then in its rounds the enormous fiat paused, 

Silence gave back to the Unknowable 

All it had given. Still was her listening thought.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>696</h3>


The form of things had ceased within her soul. 

Invisible that perfect godhead now. 

Around her some tremendous spirit lived, 

Mysterious flame around a melting pearl, 

And in the phantom of abolished Space 

There was a voice unheard by ears that cried: 

&amp;Choose, spirit, thy supreme choice not given again; 

For now from my highest being looks at thee 

The nameless formless peace where all things rest. 

In a happy vast sublime cessation know,-- 

An immense extinction in eternity, 

A point that disappears in the infinite,-- 

Felicity of the extinguished flame, 

Last sinking of a wave in a boundless sea, 

End of the trouble of thy wandering thoughts, 

Close of the journeying of thy pilgrim soul. 

Accept, O music, weariness of thy notes, 

O stream, wide breaking of thy channel banks.&amp; 

The moments fell into eternity. 

But someone yearned within a bosom unknown 

And silently the woman's heart replied: 

&amp;Thy peace, O Lord, a boon within to keep 

Amid the roar and ruin of wild Time 

For the magnificent soul of man on earth. 

Thy calm, O Lord, that bears thy hands of joy.&amp; 

Limitless like ocean round a lonely isle 

A second time the eternal cry arose: 

&amp;Wide open are the ineffable gates in front. 

My spirit leans down to break the knot of earth, 

Amorous of oneness without thought or sign 

To cast down wall and fence, to strip heaven bare, 

See with the large eye of infinity, 

Unweave the stars and into silence pass.&amp; 

In an immense and world-destroying pause 

She heard a million creatures cry to her. 

Through the tremendous stillness of her thoughts</div>

<div class="page"><h3>697</h3>


Immeasurably the woman's nature spoke: 

&amp;Thy oneness, Lord, in many approaching hearts, 

My sweet infinity of thy numberless souls.&amp; 

Mightily retreating like a sea in ebb 

A third time swelled the great admonishing call: 

&amp;I spread abroad the refuge of my wings. 

Out of its incommunicable deeps 

My power looks forth of mightiest splendour, stilled 

Into its majesty of sleep, withdrawn 

Above the dreadful whirlings of the world.&amp; 

A sob of things was answer to the voice, 

And passionately the woman's heart replied: 

&amp;Thy energy, Lord, to seize on woman and man, 

To take all things and creatures in their grief 

And gather them into a mother's arms.&amp; 

Solemn and distant like a seraph's lyre 

A last great time the warning sound was heard: 

&amp;I open the wide eye of solitude 

To uncover the voiceless rapture of my bliss, 

Where in a pure and exquisite hush it lies 

Motionless in its slumber of ecstasy, 

Resting from the sweet madness of the dance 

Out of whose beat the throb of hearts was born.&amp; 

Breaking the Silence with appeal and cry 

A hymn of adoration tireless climbed, 

A music beat of winged uniting souls, 

Then all the woman yearningly replied: 

&amp;Thy embrace which rends the living knot of pain, 

Thy joy, O Lord, in which all creatures breathe, 

Thy magic flowing waters of deep love, 

Thy sweetness give to me for earth and men.&amp;

Then after silence a still blissful cry 

Began, such as arose from the Infinite 

When the first whisperings of a strange delight 

Imagined in its deep the joy to seek,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>698</h3>


The passion to discover and to touch, 

The enamoured laugh which rhymed the chanting worlds: 

&amp;O beautiful body of the incarnate Word, 

Thy thoughts are mine, I have spoken with thy voice. 

My will is thine, what thou hast chosen I choose: 

All thou hast asked I give to earth and men. 

All shall be written out in destiny's book 

By my trustee of thought and plan and act, 

The executor of my will, eternal Time. 

But since thou hast refused my maimless Calm 

And turned from my termless peace in which is expunged 

The visage of Space and the shape of Time is lost, 

And from happy extinction of thy separate self 

In my uncompanioned lone eternity,-- 

For not for thee the nameless worldless Nought, 

Annihilation of thy living soul 

And the end of thought and hope and life and love 

In the blank measureless Unknowable,-- 

I lay my hands upon thy soul of flame, 

I lay my hands upon thy heart of love, 

I yoke thee to my power of work in Time. 

Because thou hast obeyed my timeless will, 

Because thou hast chosen to share earth's struggle and fate 

And leaned in pity over earth-bound men 

And turned aside to help and yearned to save, 

I bind by thy heart's passion thy heart to mine 

And lay my splendid yoke upon thy soul. 

Now will I do in thee my marvellous works. 

I will fasten thy nature with my cords of strength, 

Subdue to my delight thy spirit's limbs 

And make thee a vivid knot of all my bliss 

And build in thee my proud and crystal home. 

Thy days shall be my shafts of power and light, 

Thy nights my starry mysteries of joy 

And all my clouds lie tangled in thy hair 

And all my springtides marry in thy mouth.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>699</h3>


O Sun-Word, thou shalt raise the earth-soul to Light 

And bring down God into the lives of men; 

Earth shall be my work-chamber and my house, 

My garden of life to plant a seed divine. 

When all thy work in human time is done 

The mind of earth shall be a home of light, 

The life of earth a tree growing towards heaven, 

The body of earth a tabernacle of God. 

Awakened from the mortal's ignorance 

Men shall be lit with the Eternal's ray 

And the glory of my sun-lift in their thoughts 

And feel in their hearts the sweetness of my love 

And in their acts my Power's miraculous drive. 

My will shall be the meaning of their days; 

Living for me, by me, in me they shall live. 

In the heart of my creation's mystery 

I will enact the drama of thy soul, 

Inscribe the long romance of Thee and Me. 

I will pursue thee across the centuries; 

Thou shalt be hunted through the world by love, 

Naked of ignorance' protecting veil 

And without covert from my radiant gods. 

No shape shall screen thee from my divine desire, 

Nowhere shalt thou escape my living eyes. 

In the nudity of thy discovered self, 

In a bare identity with all that is, 

Disrobed of thy covering of humanity, 

Divested of the dense veil of human thought, 

Made one with every mind and body and heart, 

Made one with all Nature and with Self and God, 

Summing in thy single soul my mystic world 

I will possess in thee my universe, 

The universe find all I am in thee. 

Thou shalt bear all things that all things may change, 

Thou shalt fill all with my splendour and my bliss, 

Thou shalt meet all with thy transmuting soul.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>700</h3>


Assailed by my infinitudes above, 

And quivering in immensities below, 

Pursued by me through my mind's wall-less vast, 

Oceanic with the surges of my life, 

A swimmer lost between two leaping seas 

By my outer pains and inner sweetnesses 

Finding my joy in my opposite mysteries 

Thou shalt respond to me from every nerve. 

A vision shall compel thy coursing breath, 

Thy heart shall drive thee on the wheel of works, 

Thy mind shall urge thee through the flames of thought, 

To meet me in the abyss and on the heights, 

To feel me in the tempest and the calm, 

And love me in the noble and the vile, 

In beautiful things and terrible desire. 

The pains of hell shall be to thee my kiss, 

The flowers of heaven persuade thee with my touch. 

My fiercest masks shall my attractions bring. 

Music shall find thee in the voice of swords, 

Beauty pursue thee through the core of flame. 

Thou shalt know me in the rolling of the spheres 

And cross me in the atoms of the whirl. 

The wheeling forces of my universe 

Shall cry to thee the summons of my name. 

Delight shall drop down from my nectarous moon, 

My fragrance seize thee in the jasmine's snare, 

My eye shall look upon thee from the sun. 

Mirror of Nature's secret spirit made, 

Thou shalt reflect my hidden heart of joy, 

Thou shalt drink down my sweetness unalloyed 

In my pure lotus-cup of starry brim. 

My dreadful hands laid on thy bosom shall force 

Thy being bathed in fiercest longing's streams. 

Thou shalt discover the one and quivering note, 

And cry, the harp of all my melodies, 

And roll, my foaming wave in seas of love.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>701</h3>


Even my disasters' clutch shall be to thee 

The ordeal of my rapture's contrary shape: 

In pain's self shall smile on thee my secret face: 

Thou shalt bear my ruthless beauty unabridged 

Amid the world's intolerable wrongs, 

Trampled by the violent misdeeds of Time 

Cry out to the ecstasy of my rapture's touch. 

All beings shall be to thy life my emissaries; 

Drawn to me on the bosom of thy friend, 

Compelled to meet me in thy enemy's eyes, 

My creatures shall demand me from thy heart. 

Thou shalt not shrink from any brother soul. 

Thou shalt be attracted helplessly to all. 

Men seeing thee shall feel my hands of joy, 

In sorrow's pangs feel steps of the world's delight, 

Their life experience its tumultuous shock 

In the mutual craving of two opposites. 

Hearts touched by thy love shall answer to my call, 

Discover the ancient music of the spheres 

In the revealing accents of thy voice 

And nearer draw to me because thou art: 

Enamoured of thy spirit's loveliness 

They shall embrace my body in thy soul, 

Hear in thy life the beauty of my laugh, 

Know the thrilled bliss with which I made the worlds. 

All that thou hast, shall be for others' bliss, 

All that thou art, shall to my hands belong. 

I will pour delight from thee as from a jar, 

I will whirl thee as my chariot through the ways, 

I will use thee as my sword and as my lyre, 

I will play on thee my minstrelsies of thought. 

And when thou art vibrant with all ecstasy, 

And when thou liv'st one spirit with all things, 

Then will I spare thee not my living fires, 

But make thee a channel for my timeless force. 

My hidden presence led thee unknowing on</div>

<div class="page"><h3>702</h3>


From thy beginning in earth's voiceless bosom 

Through life and pain and time and will and death, 

Through outer shocks and inner silences 

Along the mystic roads of Space and Time 

To the experience which all Nature hides. 

Who hunts and seizes me, my captive grows: 

This shalt thou henceforth learn from thy heart-beats. 

For ever love, O beautiful slave of God! 

O lasso of my rapture's widening noose, 

Become my cord of universal love. 

The spirit ensnared by thee force to delight 

Of creation's oneness sweet and fathomless, 

Compelled to embrace my myriad unities 

And all my endless forms and divine souls. 

O Mind, grow full of the eternal peace; 

O Word, cry out the immortal litany: 

Built is the golden tower, the flame-child born. 

&amp;Descend to life with him thy heart desires. 

O Satyavan, O luminous Savitri, 

I sent you forth of old beneath the stars, 

A dual power of God in an ignorant world, 

In a hedged creation shut from limitless self, 

Bringing down God to the insentient globe, 

Lifting earth-beings to immortality. 

In the world of my knowledge and my ignorance 

Where God is unseen and only is heard a Name 

And knowledge is trapped in the boundaries of mind 

And life is hauled in the drag-net of desire 

And Matter hides the soul from its own sight, 

You are my Force at work to uplift earth's fate, 

My self that moves up the immense incline 

Between the extremes of the spirit's night and day. 

He is my soul that climbs from nescient Night 

Through life and mind and supernature's Vast 

To the supernal light of Timelessness 

And my eternity hid in moving Time</div>

<div class="page"><h3>703</h3>


And my boundlessness cut by the curve of Space. 

It climbs to the greatness it has left behind 

And to the beauty and joy from which it fell, 

To the closeness and sweetness of all things divine, 

To light without bounds and life illimitable, 

Taste of the depths of the Ineffable's bliss, 

Touch of the immortal and the infinite. 

He is my soul that gropes out of the beast 

To reach humanity's heights of lucent thought 

And the vicinity of Truth's sublime. 

He is the godhead growing in human lives 

And in the body of earth-being's forms: 

He is the soul of man climbing to God 

In Nature's surge out of earth's ignorance. 

O Savitri, thou art my spirit's Power, 

The revealing voice of my immortal Word, 

The face of Truth upon the roads of Time 

Pointing to the souls of men the routes to God. 

While the dim light from the veiled Spirit's peak 

Falls upon Matter's stark inconscient sleep 

As if a pale moonbeam on a dense glade, 

And Mind in a half-light moves amid half-truths 

And the human heart knows only human love 

And life is a stumbling and imperfect force 

And the body counts out its precarious days, 

You shall be born into man's dubious hours 

In forms that hide the soul's divinity 

And show through veils of the earth's doubting air 

My glory breaking as through clouds a sun, 

Or burning like a rare and inward fire, 

And with my nameless influence fill men's lives. 

Yet shall they look up as to peaks of God 

And feel God like a circumambient air 

And rest on God as on a motionless base. 

Yet shall there glow on mind like a horned moon 

The Spirit's crescent splendour in pale skies</div>

<div class="page"><h3>704</h3>


And light man's life upon his Godward road. 

But more there is concealed in God's Beyond 

That shall one day reveal its hidden face. 

Now mind is all and its uncertain ray, 

Mind is the leader of the body and life, 

Mind the thought-driven chariot of the soul 

Carrying the luminous wanderer in the night 

To vistas of a far uncertain dawn, 

To the end of the Spirit's fathomless desire, 

To its dream of absolute truth and utter bliss. 

There are greater destinies mind cannot surmise 

Fixed on the summit of the evolving Path 

The Traveller now treads in the Ignorance, 

Unaware of his next step, not knowing his goal. 

Mind is not all his tireless climb can reach, 

There is a fire on the apex of the worlds, 

There is a house of the Eternal's light, 

There is an infinite truth, an absolute power. 

The Spirit's mightiness shall cast off its mask; 

Its greatness shall be felt shaping the world's course: 

It shall be seen in its own veilless beams, 

A star rising from the Inconscient's night, 

A sun climbing to Supernature's peak. 

Abandoning the dubious middle Way, 

A few shall glimpse the miraculous Origin 

And some shall feel in you the secret Force 

And they shall turn to meet a nameless tread, 

Adventurers into a mightier Day. 

Ascending out of the limiting breadths of mind, 

They shall discover the world's huge design 

And step into the Truth, the Right, the Vast. 

You shall reveal to them the hidden eternities, 

The breath of infinitudes not yet revealed, 

Some rapture of the bliss that made the world, 

Some rush of the force of God's omnipotence, 

Some beam of the omniscient Mystery.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>705</h3>


But when the hour of the Divine draws near 

The Mighty Mother shall take birth in Time 

And God be born into the human clay 

In forms made ready by your human lives. 

Then shall the Truth supreme be given to men: 

There is a being beyond the being of mind, 

An Immeasurable cast into many forms, 

A miracle of the multitudinous One, 

There is a consciousness mind cannot touch, 

Its speech cannot utter nor its thought reveal. 

It has no home on earth, no centre in man, 

Yet is the source of all things thought and done, 

The fount of the creation and its works, 

It is the origin of all truth here, 

The sun-orb of mind's fragmentary rays, 

Infinity's heaven that spills the rain of God, 

The Immense that calls to man to expand the Spirit, 

The wide Aim that justifies his narrow attempts, 

A channel for the little he tastes of bliss. 

Some shall be made the glory's receptacles 

And vehicles of the Eternal's luminous power. 

These are the high forerunners, the heads of Time, 

The great deliverers of earth-bound mind, 

The high transfigurers of human clay, 

The first-born of a new supernal race. 

The incarnate dual Power shall open God's door, 

Eternal supermind touch earthly Time. 

The superman shall wake in mortal man 

And manifest the hidden demigod 

Or grow into the God-Light and God-Force 

Revealing the secret deity in the cave. 

Then shall the earth be touched by the Supreme, 

His bright unveiled Transcendence shall illumine 

The mind and heart and force the life and act 

To interpret his inexpressible mystery 

In a heavenly alphabet of Divinity's signs.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>706</h3>


His living cosmic spirit shall enring, 

Annulling the decree of death and pain, 

Erasing the formulas of the Ignorance, 

With the deep meaning of beauty and life's hid sense, 

The being ready for immortality, 

His regard crossing infinity's mystic waves 

Bring back to Nature her early joy to live, 

The metred heart-beats of a lost delight, 

The cry of a forgotten ecstasy, 

The dance of the first world-creating Bliss. 

The Immanent shall be the witness God 

Watching on his many-petalled lotus-throne 

His actionless being and his silent might 

Ruling earth-nature by eternity's law, 

A thinker waking the Inconscient's world, 

An immobile centre of many infinitudes 

In his thousand-pillared temple by Time's sea. 

Then shall the embodied being live as one 

Who is a thought, a will of the Divine, 

A mask or robe of his divinity, 

An instrument and partner of his Force, 

A point or line drawn in the infinite, 

A manifest of the Imperishable. 

The supermind shall be his nature's fount, 

The Eternal's truth shall mould his thoughts and acts, 

The Eternal's truth shall be his light and guide. 

All then shall change, a magic order come 

Overtopping this mechanical universe. 

A mightier race shall inhabit the mortal's world. 

On Nature's luminous tops, on the Spirit's ground, 

The superman shall reign as king of life, 

Make earth almost the mate and peer of heaven, 

And lead towards God and truth man's ignorant heart 

And lift towards godhead his mortality. 

A power released from circumscribing bounds, 

Its height pushed up beyond death's hungry reach,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>707</h3>


Life's tops shall flame with the Immortal's thoughts, 

Light shall invade the darkness of its base. 

Then in the process of evolving Time 

All shall be drawn into a single plan, 

A divine harmony shall be earth's law, 

Beauty and joy remould her way to live: 

Even the body shall remember God, 

Nature shall draw back from mortality 

And Spirit's fires shall guide the earth's blind force; 

Knowledge shall bring into the aspirant Thought 

A high proximity to Truth and God. 

The supermind shall claim the world for Light 

And thrill with love of God the enamoured heart 

And place Light's crown on Nature's lifted head 

And found Light's reign on her unshaking base. 

A greater truth than earth's shall roof-in earth 

And shed its sunlight on the roads of mind; 

A power infallible shall lead the thought, 

A seeing Puissance govern life and act, 

In earthly hearts kindle the Immortal's fire. 

A soul shall wake in the Inconscient's house; 

The mind shall be God-vision's tabernacle, 

The body intuition's instrument, 

And life a channel for God's visible power. 

All earth shall be the Spirit's manifest home, 

Hidden no more by the body and the life, 

Hidden no more by the mind's ignorance; 

An unerring Hand shall shape event and act. 

The Spirit's eyes shall look through Nature's eyes, 

The Spirit's force shall occupy Nature's force. 

This world shall be God's visible garden-house, 

The earth shall be a field and camp of God, 

Man shall forget consent to mortality 

And his embodied frail impermanence. 

This universe shall unseal its occult sense, 

Creation's process change its antique front,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>708</h3>


An ignorant evolution's hierarchy 

Release the Wisdom chained below its base. 

The Spirit shall be the master of his world 

Lurking no more in form's obscurity 

And Nature shall reverse her action's rule, 

The outward world disclose the Truth it veils; 

All things shall manifest the covert God, 

All shall reveal the Spirit's light and might 

And move to its destiny of felicity. 

Even should a hostile force cling to its reign 

And claim its right's perpetual sovereignty 

And man refuse his high spiritual fate, 

Yet shall the secret Truth in things prevail. 

For in the march of all-fulfilling Time 

The hour must come of the Transcendent's will: 

All turns and winds towards his predestined ends 

In Nature's fixed inevitable course 

Decreed since the beginning of the worlds 

In the deep essence of created things: 

Even there shall come as a high crown of all 

The end of Death, the death of Ignorance. 

But first high Truth must set her feet on earth 

And man aspire to the Eternal's light 

And all his members feel the Spirit's touch 

And all his life obey an inner Force. 

This too shall be; for a new life shall come, 

A body of the Superconscient's truth, 

A native field of Supernature's mights: 

It shall make earth's nescient ground Truth's colony, 

Make even the Ignorance a transparent robe 

Through which shall shine the brilliant limbs of Truth 

And Truth shall be a sun on Nature's head 

And Truth shall be the guide of Nature's steps 

And Truth shall gaze out of her nether deeps. 

When superman is born as Nature's king 

His presence shall transfigure Matter's world:</div>

<div class="page"><h3>709</h3>


He shall light up Truth's fire in Nature's night, 

He shall lay upon the earth Truth's greater law; 

Man too shall turn towards the Spirit's call. 

Awake to his hidden possibility, 

Awake to all that slept within his heart 

And all that Nature meant when earth was formed 

And the Spirit made this ignorant world his home, 

He shall aspire to Truth and God and Bliss. 

Interpreter of a diviner law 

And instrument of a supreme design, 

The higher kind shall lean to lift up man. 

Man shall desire to climb to his own heights. 

The truth above shall wake a nether truth, 

Even the dumb earth become a sentient force. 

The Spirit's tops and Nature's base shall draw 

Near to the secret of their separate truth 

And know each other as one deity. 

The Spirit shall look out through Matter's gaze 

And Matter shall reveal the Spirit's face. 

Then man and superman shall be at one 

And all the earth become a single life. 

Even the multitude shall hear the Voice 

And turn to commune with the Spirit within 

And strive to obey the high spiritual law: 

This earth shall stir with impulses sublime, 

Humanity awake to deepest self, 

Nature the hidden godhead recognise. 

Even the many shall some answer make 

And bear the splendour of the Divine's rush 

And his impetuous knock at unseen doors. 

A heavenlier passion shall upheave men's lives, 

Their mind shall share in the ineffable gleam, 

Their heart shall feel the ecstasy and the fire. 

Earth's bodies shall be conscious of a soul; 

Mortality's bondslaves shall unloose their bonds, 

Mere men into spiritual beings grow</div>

<div class="page"><h3>710</h3>


And see awake the dumb divinity. 

Intuitive beams shall touch the nature's peaks, 

A revelation stir the nature's depths; 

The Truth shall be the leader of their lives, 

Truth shall dictate their thought and speech and act, 

They shall feel themselves lifted nearer to the sky, 

As if a little lower than the gods. 

For knowledge shall pour down in radiant streams 

And even darkened mind quiver with new life 

And kindle and burn with the Ideal's fire 

And turn to escape from mortal ignorance. 

The frontiers of the Ignorance shall recede, 

More and more souls shall enter into light, 

Minds lit, inspired, the occult summoner hear 

And lives blaze with a sudden inner flame 

And hearts grow enamoured of divine delight 

And human wills tune to the divine will, 

These separate selves the Spirit's oneness feel, 

These senses of heavenly sense grow capable, 

The flesh and nerves of a strange ethereal joy 

And mortal bodies of immortality. 

A divine force shall flow through tissue and cell 

And take the charge of breath and speech and act 

And all the thoughts shall be a glow of suns 

And every feeling a celestial thrill. 

Often a lustrous inner dawn shall come 

Lighting the chambers of the slumbering mind; 

A sudden bliss shall run through every limb 

And Nature with a mightier Presence fill. 

Thus shall the earth open to divinity 

And common natures feel the wide uplift, 

Illumine common acts with the Spirit's ray 

And meet the deity in common things. 

Nature shall live to manifest secret God, 

The Spirit shall take up the human play, 

This earthly life become the life divine.&amp;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>711</h3>


The measure of that subtle music ceased. 

Down with a hurried swimming floating lapse 

Through unseen worlds and bottomless spaces forced 

Sank like a star the soul of Savitri. 

Amidst a laughter of unearthly lyres 

She heard around her nameless voices cry 

Triumphing, an innumerable sound. 

A choir of rushing winds to meet her came. 

She bore the burden of infinity 

And felt the stir of all ethereal space. 

Pursuing her in her fall, implacably sweet, 

A face was over her which seemed a youth's, 

Symbol of all the beauty eyes see not, 

Crowned as with peacock plumes of gorgeous hue 

Framing a sapphire, whose heart-disturbing smile 

Insatiably attracted to delight, 

Voluptuous to the embraces of her soul. 

Changed in its shape, yet rapturously the same, 

It grew a woman's dark and beautiful 

Like a mooned night with drifting star-gemmed clouds, 

A shadowy glory and a stormy depth, 

Turbulent in will and terrible in love. 

Eyes in which Nature's blind ecstatic life 

Sprang from some spirit's passionate content, 

Missioned her to the whirling dance of earth. 

Amidst the headlong rapture of her fall 

Held like a bird in a child's satisfied hands, 

In an enamoured grasp her spirit strove 

Admitting no release till Time should end, 

And, as the fruit of the mysterious joy, 

She kept within her strong embosoming soul 

Like a flower hidden in the heart of spring 

The soul of Satyavan drawn down by her 

Inextricably in that mighty lapse. 

Invisible heavens in a thronging flight 

Soared past her as she fell. Then all the blind</div>

<div class="page"><h3>712</h3>


And near attraction of the earth compelled 

Fearful rapidities of downward bliss. 

Lost in the giddy proneness of that speed, 

Whirled, sinking, overcome she disappeared, 

Like a leaf spinning from the tree of heaven, 

In broad unconsciousness as in a pool; 

A hospitable softness drew her in 

Into a wonder of miraculous depths, 

Above her closed a darkness of great wings 

And she was buried in a mother's breast. 

Then from a timeless plane that watches Time, 

A Spirit gazed out upon destiny, 

In its endless moment saw the ages pass. 

All still was in a silence of the gods. 

The prophet moment covered limitless Space 

And cast into the heart of hurrying Time 

A diamond light of the Eternal's peace, 

A crimson seed of God's felicity; 

A glance from the gaze fell of undying Love. 

A wonderful face looked out with deathless eyes; 

A hand was seen drawing the golden bars 

That guard the imperishable secrecies. 

A key turned in a mystic lock of Time. 

But where the silence of the gods had passed, 

A greater harmony from the stillness born 

Surprised with joy and sweetness yearning hearts, 

An ecstasy and a laughter and a cry. 

A power leaned down, a happiness found its home. 

Over wide earth brooded the infinite bliss.</div>

