<h2>Book 2 Canto 7 - The Book of the Traveller of the Worlds - The Descent into Night</h2>

<div class="page"><h3>202</h3>


A mind absolved from life, made calm to know, 

A heart divorced from the blindness and the pang, 

The seal of tears, the bond of ignorance, 

He turned to find that wide world-failure's cause. 

Away he looked from Nature's visible face 

And sent his gaze into the viewless Vast, 

The formidable unknown Infinity, 

Asleep behind the endless coil of things, 

That carries the universe in its timeless breadths 

And the ripples of its being are our lives. 

The worlds are built by its unconscious Breath 

And Matter and Mind are its figures or its powers, 

Our waking thoughts the output of its dreams. 

The veil was rent that covers Nature's depths: 

He saw the fount of the world's lasting pain 

And the mouth of the black pit of Ignorance; 

The evil guarded at the roots of life 

Raised up its head and looked into his eyes. 

On a dim bank where dies subjective Space, 

From a stark ridge overlooking all that is, 

A tenebrous awakened Nescience, 

Her wide blank eyes wondering at Time and Form, 

Stared at the inventions of the living Void 

And the Abyss whence our beginnings rose. 

Behind appeared a grey carved mask of Night 

Watching the birth of all created things. 

A hidden Puissance conscious of its force, 

A vague and lurking Presence everywhere, 

A contrary Doom that threatens all things made, 

A Death figuring as the dark seed of life, 

Seemed to engender and to slay the world.</div>

<div class="page"><h3>203</h3>


Then from the sombre mystery of the gulfs 

And from the hollow bosom of the Mask 

Something crept forth that seemed a shapeless Thought. 

A fatal Influence upon creatures stole 

Whose lethal touch pursued the immortal spirit, 

On life was laid the haunting finger of death 

And overcast with error, grief and pain 

The soul's native will for truth and joy and light. 

A deformation coiled that claimed to be 

The being's very turn, Nature's true drive. 

A hostile and perverting Mind at work 

In every corner ensconced of conscious life 

Corrupted Truth with her own formulas; 

Interceptor of the listening of the soul, 

Afflicting knowledge with the hue of doubt 

It captured the oracles of the occult gods, 

Effaced the signposts of Life's pilgrimage, 

Cancelled the firm rock-edicts graved by Time, 

And on the foundations of the cosmic Law 

Erected its bronze pylons of misrule. 

Even Light and Love by that cloaked danger's spell 

Turned from the brilliant nature of the gods 

To fallen angels and misleading suns, 

Became themselves a danger and a charm, 

A perverse sweetness, heaven-born malefice: 

Its power could deform divinest things. 

A wind of sorrow breathed upon the world; 

All thought with falsehood was besieged, all act 

Stamped with defect or with frustration's sign, 

All high attempt with failure or vain success, 

But none could know the reason of his fall. 

The grey Mask whispered and, though no sound was heard, 

Yet in the ignorant heart a seed was sown 

That bore black fruit of suffering, death and bale. 

Out of the chill steppes of a bleak Unseen 

Invisible, wearing the Night's grey mask,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>204</h3>


Arrived the shadowy dreadful messengers, 

Invaders from a dangerous world of power, 

Ambassadors of evil's absolute. 

In silence the inaudible voices spoke, 

Hands that none saw planted the fatal grain, 

No form was seen, yet a dire work was done, 

An iron decree in crooked uncials written 

Imposed a law of sin and adverse fate. 

Life looked at him with changed and sombre eyes: 

Her beauty he saw and the yearning heart in things 

That with a little happiness is content, 

Answering to a small ray of truth or love; 

He saw her gold sunlight and her far blue sky, 

Her green of leaves and hue and scent of flowers 

And the charm of children and the love of friends 

And the beauty of women and kindly hearts of men, 

But saw too the dreadful Powers that drive her moods 

And the anguish she has strewn upon her ways, 

Fate waiting on the unseen steps of men 

And her evil and sorrow and last gift of death. 

A breath of disillusion and decadence 

Corrupting watched for Life's maturity 

And made to rot the full grain of the soul: 

Progress became a purveyor of Death. 

A world that clung to the law of a slain Light 

Cherished the putrid corpses of dead truths, 

Hailed twisted forms as things free, new and true, 

Beauty from ugliness and evil drank 

Feeling themselves guests at a banquet of the gods 

And tasted corruption like a high-spiced food. 

A darkness settled on the heavy air; 

It hunted the bright smile from Nature's lips 

And slew the native confidence in her heart 

And put fear's crooked look into her eyes. 

The lust that warps the spirit's natural good 

Replaced by a manufactured virtue and vice</div>

<div class="page"><h3>205</h3>


The frank spontaneous impulse of the soul: 

Afflicting Nature with the dual's lie, 

Their twin values whetted a forbidden zest, 

Made evil a relief from spurious good, 

The ego battened on righteousness and sin 

And each became an instrument of Hell. 

In rejected heaps by a monotonous road 

The old simple delights were left to lie 

On the wasteland of life's descent to Night. 

All glory of life was dimmed, tarnished with doubt; 

All beauty ended in an aging face; 

All power was dubbed a tyranny cursed by God 

And Truth a fiction needed by the mind: 

The chase of joy was now a tired hunt; 

All knowledge was left a questioning Ignorance.

As from a womb obscure he saw emerge 

The body and visage of a dark Unseen 

Hidden behind the fair outsides of life. 

Its dangerous commerce is our suffering's cause. 

Its breath is a subtle poison in men's hearts; 

All evil starts from that ambiguous face. 

A peril haunted now the common air; 

The world grew full of menacing Energies, 

And wherever turned for help or hope his eyes, 

In field and house, in street and camp and mart 

He met the prowl and stealthy come and go 

Of armed disquieting bodied Influences. 

A march of goddess figures dark and nude 

Alarmed the air with grandiose unease; 

Appalling footsteps drew invisibly near, 

Shapes that were threats invaded the dream-light, 

And ominous beings passed him on the road 

Whose very gaze was a calamity: 

A charm and sweetness sudden and formidable, 

Faces that raised alluring lips and eyes </div>

<div class="page"><h3>206</h3>


Approached him armed with beauty like a snare, 

But hid a fatal meaning in each line 

And could in a moment dangerously change. 

But he alone discerned that screened attack. 

A veil upon the inner vision lay, 

A force was there that hid its dreadful steps; 

All was belied, yet thought itself the truth; 

All were beset but knew not of the siege: 

For none could see the authors of their fall. 

Aware of some dark wisdom still withheld 

That was the seal and warrant of this strength, 

He followed the track of dim tremendous steps 

Returning to the night from which they came. 

A tract he reached unbuilt and owned by none: 

There all could enter but none stay for long. 

It was a no man's land of evil air, 

A crowded neighbourhood without one home, 

A borderland between the world and hell. 

There unreality was Nature's lord: 

It was a space where nothing could be true, 

For nothing was what it had claimed to be: 

A high appearance wrapped a specious void. 

Yet nothing would confess its own pretence 

Even to itself in the ambiguous heart: 

A vast deception was the law of things; 

Only by that deception they could live. 

An unsubstantial Nihil guaranteed 

The falsehood of the forms this Nature took 

And made them seem awhile to be and live. 

A borrowed magic drew them from the Void; 

They took a shape and stuff that was not theirs 

And showed a colour that they could not keep, 

Mirrors to a phantasm of reality. 

Each rainbow brilliance was a splendid lie; 

A beauty unreal graced a glamour face. 

Nothing could be relied on to remain:</div>

<div class="page"><h3>207</h3>


Joy nurtured tears and good an evil proved, 

But never out of evil one plucked good: 

Love ended early in hate, delight killed with pain, 

Truth into falsity grew and death ruled life. 

A Power that laughed at the mischiefs of the world, 

An irony that joined the world's contraries 

And flung them into each other's arms to strive, 

Put a sardonic rictus on God's face. 

Aloof, its influence entered everywhere 

And left a cloven hoof-mark on the breast; 

A twisted heart and a strange sombre smile 

Mocked at the sinister comedy of life. 

Announcing the advent of a perilous Form 

An ominous tread softened its dire footfall 

That none might understand or be on guard; 

None heard until a dreadful grasp was close. 

Or else all augured a divine approach, 

An air of prophecy felt, a heavenly hope, 

Listened for a gospel, watched for a new star. 

The Fiend was visible but cloaked in light; 

He seemed a helping angel from the skies: 

He armed untruth with Scripture and the Law; 

He deceived with wisdom, with virtue slew the soul 

And led to perdition by the heavenward path. 

A lavish sense he gave of power and joy, 

And, when arose the warning from within, 

He reassured the ear with dulcet tones 

Or took the mind captive in its own net; 

His rigorous logic made the false seem true. 

Amazing the elect with holy lore 

He spoke as with the very voice of God. 

The air was full of treachery and ruse; 

Truth-speaking was a stratagem in that place; 

Ambush lurked in a smile and peril made 

Safety its cover, trust its entry's gate: 

Falsehood came laughing with the eyes of truth;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>208</h3>


Each friend might turn an enemy or spy, 

The hand one clasped ensleeved a dagger's stab 

And an embrace could be Doom's iron cage. 

Agony and danger stalked their trembling prey 

And softly spoke as to a timid friend: 

Attack sprang suddenly vehement and unseen; 

Fear leaped upon the heart at every turn 

And cried out with an anguished dreadful voice; 

It called for one to save but none came near. 

All warily walked, for death was ever close; 

Yet caution seemed a vain expense of care, 

For all that guarded proved a deadly net, 

And when after long suspense salvation came 

And brought a glad relief disarming strength, 

It served as a smiling passage to worse fate. 

There was no truce and no safe place to rest; 

One dared not slumber or put off one's arms: 

It was a world of battle and surprise. 

All who were there lived for themselves alone; 

All warred against all, but with a common hate 

Turned on the mind that sought some higher good; 

Truth was exiled lest she should dare to speak 

And hurt the heart of darkness with her light 

Or bring her pride of knowledge to blaspheme 

The settled anarchy of established things.

Then the scene changed, but kept its dreadful core: 

Altering its form the life remained the same. 

A capital was there without a State: 

It had no ruler, only groups that strove. 

He saw a city of ancient Ignorance 

Founded upon a soil that knew not Light. 

There each in his own darkness walked alone: 

Only they agreed to differ in Evil's paths, 

To live in their own way for their own selves 

Or to enforce a common lie and wrong; </div>

<div class="page"><h3>209</h3>


There Ego was lord upon his peacock seat 

And Falsehood sat by him, his mate and queen: 

The world turned to them as Heaven to Truth and God. 

Injustice justified by firm decrees 

The sovereign weights of Error's legalised trade, 

But all the weights were false and none the same; 

Ever she watched with her balance and a sword, 

Lest any sacrilegious word expose 

The sanctified formulas of her old misrule. 

In high professions wrapped self-will walked wide 

And licence stalked prating of order and right: 

There was no altar raised to Liberty; 

True freedom was abhorred and hunted down: 

Harmony and tolerance nowhere could be seen; 

Each group proclaimed its dire and naked Law. 

A frame of ethics knobbed with scriptural rules 

Or a theory passionately believed and praised 

A table seemed of high Heaven's sacred code. 

A formal practice mailed and iron-shod 

Gave to a rude and ruthless warrior kind 

Drawn from the savage bowels of the earth 

A proud stern poise of harsh nobility, 

A civic posture rigid and formidable. 

But all their private acts belied the pose: 

Power and utility were their Truth and Right, 

An eagle rapacity clawed its coveted good, 

Beaks pecked and talons tore all weaker prey. 

In their sweet secrecy of pleasant sins 

Nature they obeyed and not a moralist God. 

Inconscient traders in bundles of contraries, 

They did what in others they would persecute; 

When their eyes looked upon their fellow's vice, 

An indignation flamed, a virtuous wrath; 

Oblivious of their own deep-hid offence, 

Moblike they stoned a neighbour caught in sin. 

A pragmatist judge within passed false decrees,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>210</h3>


Posed worst iniquities on equity's base, 

Reasoned ill actions just, sanctioned the scale 

Of the merchant ego's interest and desire. 

Thus was a balance kept, the world could live. 

A zealot fervour pushed their ruthless cults, 

All faith not theirs bled scourged as heresy; 

They questioned, captived, tortured, burned or smote 

And forced the soul to abandon right or die. 

Amid her clashing creeds and warring sects 

Religion sat upon a blood-stained throne. 

A hundred tyrannies oppressed and slew 

And founded unity upon fraud and force. 

Only what seemed was prized as real there: 

The ideal was a cynic ridicule's butt; 

Hooted by the crowd, mocked by enlightened wits, 

Spiritual seeking wandered outcasted,-- 

A dreamer's self-deceiving web of thought 

Or mad chimaera deemed or hypocrite's fake, 

Its passionate instinct trailed through minds obscure 

Lost in the circuits of the Ignorance. 

A lie was there the truth and truth a lie. 

Here must the traveller of the upward Way-- 

For daring Hell's kingdoms winds the heavenly route-- 

Pause or pass slowly through that perilous space, 

A prayer upon his lips and the great Name. 

If probed not all discernment's keen spear-point, 

He might stumble into falsity's endless net. 

Over his shoulder often he must look back 

Like one who feels on his neck an enemy's breath; 

Else stealing up behind a treasonous blow 

Might prostrate cast and pin to unholy soil, 

Pierced through his back by Evil's poignant stake. 

So might one fall on the Eternal's road 

Forfeiting the spirit's lonely chance in Time 

And no news of him reach the waiting gods, 

Marked &amp;missing&amp; in the register of souls,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>211</h3>


His name the index of a failing hope, 

The position of a dead remembered star. 

Only were safe who kept God in their hearts: 

Courage their armour, faith their sword, they must walk, 

The hand ready to smite, the eye to scout, 

Casting a javelin regard in front, 

Heroes and soldiers of the army of Light. 

Hardly even so, the grisly danger past, 

Released into a calmer purer air, 

They dared at length to breathe and smile once more. 

Once more they moved beneath a real sun. 

Though Hell claimed rule, the spirit still had power. 

This No-man's-land he passed without debate; 

Him the heights missioned, him the Abyss desired: 

None stood across his way, no voice forbade. 

For swift and easy is the downward path, 

And now towards the Night was turned his face.

A greater darkness waited, a worse reign, 

If worse can be where all is evil's extreme; 

Yet to the cloaked the uncloaked is naked worst. 

There God and Truth and the supernal Light 

Had never been or else had power no more. 

As when one slips in a deep moment's trance 

Over mind's border into another world, 

He crossed a boundary whose stealthy trace 

Eye could not see but only the soul feel. 

Into an armoured fierce domain he came 

And saw himself wandering like a lost soul 

Amid grimed walls and savage slums of Night. 

Around him crowded grey and squalid huts 

Neighbouring proud palaces of perverted Power, 

Inhuman quarters and demoniac wards. 

A pride in evil hugged its wretchedness; 

A misery haunting splendour pressed those fell 

Dun suburbs of the cities of dream-life. </div>

<div class="page"><h3>212</h3>


There Life displayed to the spectator soul 

The shadow depths of her strange miracle. 

A strong and fallen goddess without hope, 

Obscured, deformed by some dire Gorgon spell, 

As might a harlot empress in a bouge, 

Nude, unashamed, exulting she upraised 

Her evil face of perilous beauty and charm 

And, drawing panic to a shuddering kiss 

Twixt the magnificence of her fatal breasts, 

Allured to their abyss the spirit's fall. 

Across his field of sight she multiplied 

As on a scenic film or moving plate 

The implacable splendour of her nightmare pomps. 

On the dark background of a soulless world 

She staged between a lurid light and shade 

Her dramas of the sorrow of the depths 

Written on the agonised nerves of living things: 

Epics of horror and grim majesty, 

Wry statues spat and stiffened in life's mud, 

A glut of hideous forms and hideous deeds 

Paralysed pity in the hardened breast. 

In booths of sin and night-repairs of vice 

Styled infamies of the body's concupiscence 

And sordid imaginations etched in flesh, 

Turned lust into a decorative art: 

Abusing Nature's gift her pervert skill 

Immortalised the sown grain of living death, 

In a mud goblet poured the bacchic wine, 

To a satyr gave the thyrsus of a god. 

Impure, sadistic, with grimacing mouths, 

Grey foul inventions gruesome and macabre 

Came televisioned from the gulfs of Night. 

Her craft ingenious in monstrosity, 

Impatient of all natural shape and poise, 

A gape of nude exaggerated lines, 

Gave caricature a stark reality,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>213</h3>


And art-parades of weird distorted forms, 

And gargoyle masques obscene and terrible 

Trampled to tormented postures the torn sense. 

An inexorable evil's worshipper, 

She made vileness great and sublimated filth; 

A dragon power of reptile energies 

And strange epiphanies of grovelling Force 

And serpent grandeurs couching in the mire 

Drew adoration to a gleam of slime. 

All Nature pulled out of her frame and base 

Was twisted into an unnatural pose: 

Repulsion stimulated inert desire; 

Agony was made a red-spiced food for bliss, 

Hatred was trusted with the work of lust 

And torture took the form of an embrace; 

A ritual anguish consecrated death; 

Worship was offered to the Undivine. 

A new aesthesis of Inferno's art 

That trained the mind to love what the soul hates, 

Imposed allegiance on the quivering nerves 

And forced the unwilling body to vibrate. 

Too sweet and too harmonious to excite 

In this regime that soiled the being's core, 

Beauty was banned, the heart's feeling dulled to sleep 

And cherished in their place sensation's thrills; 

The world was probed for jets of sense-appeal. 

Here cold material intellect was the judge 

And needed sensual prick and jog and lash 

That its hard dryness and dead nerves might feel 

Some passion and power and acrid point of life. 

A new philosophy theorised evil's rights, 

Gloried in the shimmering rot of decadence, 

Or gave to a python Force persuasive speech 

And armed with knowledge the primaeval brute. 

Over life and Matter only brooding bowed, 

Mind changed to the image of a rampant beast;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>214</h3>


It scrambled into the pit to dig for truth 

And lighted its search with the subconscient's flares. 

Thence bubbling rose sullying the upper air, 

The filth and festering secrets of the Abyss: 

This it called positive fact and real life. 

This now composed the fetid atmosphere. 

A wild-beast passion crept from secret Night 

To watch its prey with fascinating eyes: 

Around him like a fire with sputtering tongues 

There lolled and laughed a bestial ecstasy; 

The air was packed with longings brute and fierce; 

Crowding and stinging in a monstrous swarm 

Pressed with a noxious hum into his mind 

Thoughts that could poison Nature's heavenliest breath, 

Forcing reluctant lids assailed the sight 

Acts that revealed the mystery of Hell. 

All that was there was on this pattern made.

A race possessed inhabited those parts. 

A force demoniac lurking in man's depths 

That heaves suppressed by the heart's human law, 

Awed by the calm and sovereign eyes of Thought, 

Can in a fire and earthquake of the soul 

Arise and, calling to its native night, 

Overthrow the reason, occupy the life 

And stamp its hoof on Nature's shaking ground: 

This was for them their being's flaming core. 

A mighty energy, a monster god, 

Hard to the strong, implacable to the weak, 

It stared at the harsh unpitying world it made 

With the stony eyelids of its fixed idea. 

Its heart was drunk with a dire hunger's wine, 

In others' suffering felt a thrilled delight 

And of death and ruin the grandiose music heard. 

To have power, to be master, was sole virtue and good: 

It claimed the whole world for Evil's living room, </div>

<div class="page"><h3>215</h3>


Its party's grim totalitarian reign 

The cruel destiny of breathing things. 

All on one plan was shaped and standardised 

Under a dark dictatorship's breathless weight. 

In street and house, in councils and in courts 

Beings he met who looked like living men 

And climbed in speech upon high wings of thought 

But harboured all that is subhuman, vile 

And lower than the lowest reptile's crawl. 

The reason meant for nearness to the gods 

And uplift to heavenly scale by the touch of mind 

Only enhanced by its enlightening ray 

Their inborn nature's wry monstrosity. 

Often, a familiar visage studying 

Joyfully encountered at some dangerous turn, 

Hoping to recognise a look of light, 

His vision warned by the spirit's inward eye 

Discovered suddenly Hell's trademark there, 

Or saw with the inner sense that cannot err, 

In the semblance of a fair or virile form 

The demon and the goblin and the ghoul. 

An insolence reigned of cold stone-hearted strength 

Mighty, obeyed, approved by the Titan's law, 

The huge laughter of a giant cruelty 

And fierce glad deeds of ogre violence. 

In that wide cynic den of thinking beasts 

One looked in vain for a trace of pity or love; 

There was no touch of sweetness anywhere, 

But only Force and its acolytes, greed and hate: 

There was no help for suffering, none to save, 

None dared resist or speak a noble word. 

Armed with the aegis of tyrannic Power, 

Signing the edicts of her dreadful rule 

And using blood and torture as a seal, 

Darkness proclaimed her slogans to the world. 

A servile blinkered silence hushed the mind</div>

<div class="page"><h3>216</h3>


Or only it repeated lessons taught, 

While mitred, holding the good shepherd's staff, 

Falsehood enthroned on awed and prostrate hearts 

The cults and creeds that organise living death 

And slay the soul on the altar of a lie. 

All were deceived or served their own deceit; 

Truth in that stifling atmosphere could not live. 

There wretchedness believed in its own joy 

And fear and weakness hugged their abject depths; 

All that is low and sordid-thoughted, base, 

All that is drab and poor and miserable, 

Breathed in a lax content its natural air 

And felt no yearning of divine release: 

Arrogant, gibing at more luminous states 

The people of the gulfs despised the sun. 

A barriered autarchy excluded light; 

Fixed in its will to be its own grey self, 

It vaunted its norm unique and splendid type: 

It soothed its hunger with a plunderer's dream; 

Flaunting its cross of servitude like a crown, 

It clung to its dismal harsh autonomy. 

A bull-throat bellowed with its brazen tongue; 

Its hard and shameless clamour filling Space 

And threatening all who dared to listen to truth 

Claimed the monopoly of the battered ear; 

A deafened acquiescence gave its vote, 

And braggart dogmas shouted in the night 

Kept for the fallen soul once deemed a god 

The pride of its abysmal absolute.

A lone discoverer in these menacing realms 

Guarded like termite cities from the sun, 

Oppressed mid crowd and tramp and noise and flare, 

Passing from dusk to deeper dangerous dusk, 

He wrestled with powers that snatched from mind its light 

And smote from him their clinging influences. </div>

<div class="page"><h3>217</h3>


Soon he emerged in a dim wall-less space. 

For now the peopled tracts were left behind; 

He walked between wide banks of failing eve. 

Around him grew a gaunt spiritual blank, 

A threatening waste, a sinister loneliness 

That left mind bare to an unseen assault, 

An empty page on which all that willed could write 

Stark monstrous messages without control. 

A travelling dot on downward roads of Dusk 

Mid barren fields and barns and straggling huts 

And a few crooked and phantasmal trees, 

He faced a sense of death and conscious void. 

But still a hostile Life unseen was there 

Whose deathlike poise resisting light and truth 

Made living a bleak gap in nullity. 

He heard the grisly voices that deny; 

Assailed by thoughts that swarmed like spectral hordes, 

A prey to the staring phantoms of the gloom 

And terror approaching with its lethal mouth, 

Driven by a strange will down ever down, 

The sky above a communiquÇ of Doom, 

He strove to shield his spirit from despair, 

But felt the horror of the growing Night 

And the Abyss rising to claim his soul. 

Then ceased the abodes of creatures and their forms 

And solitude wrapped him in its voiceless folds. 

All vanished suddenly like a thought expunged; 

His spirit became an empty listening gulf 

Void of the dead illusion of a world: 

Nothing was left, not even an evil face. 

He was alone with the grey python Night. 

A dense and nameless Nothing conscious, mute, 

Which seemed alive but without body or mind, 

Lusted all beings to annihilate 

That it might be for ever nude and sole. 

As in a shapeless beast's intangible jaws,</div>

<div class="page"><h3>218</h3>


Gripped, strangled by that lusting viscous blot, 

Attracted to some black and giant mouth 

And swallowing throat and a huge belly of doom, 

His being from its own vision disappeared 

Drawn towards depths that hungered for its fall. 

A formless void oppressed his struggling brain, 

A darkness grim and cold benumbed his flesh, 

A whispered grey suggestion chilled his heart; 

Haled by a serpent-force from its warm home 

And dragged to extinction in bleak vacancy 

Life clung to its seat with cords of gasping breath; 

Lapped was his body by a tenebrous tongue. 

Existence smothered travailed to survive; 

Hope strangled perished in his empty soul, 

Belief and memory abolished died 

And all that helps the spirit in its course. 

There crawled through every tense and aching nerve 

Leaving behind its poignant quaking trail 

A nameless and unutterable fear. 

As a sea nears a victim bound and still, 

The approach alarmed his mind for ever dumb 

Of an implacable eternity 

Of pain inhuman and intolerable. 

This he must bear, his hope of heaven estranged; 

He must ever exist without extinction's peace 

In a slow suffering Time and tortured Space, 

An anguished nothingness his endless state. 

A lifeless vacancy was now his breast, 

And in the place where once was luminous thought, 

Only remained like a pale motionless ghost 

An incapacity for faith and hope 

And the dread conviction of a vanquished soul 

Immortal still but with its godhead lost, 

Self lost and God and touch of happier worlds. 

But he endured, stilled the vain terror, bore 

The smothering coils of agony and affright;</div>

<div class="page"><h3>219</h3>


Then peace returned and the soul's sovereign gaze. 

To the blank horror a calm Light replied: 

Immutable, undying and unborn, 

Mighty and mute the Godhead in him woke 

And faced the pain and danger of the world. 

He mastered the tides of Nature with a look: 

He met with his bare spirit naked Hell.</div>

