<!--post_id: 23-->
[info]source: http://acd.icelp.info/what-we-teach/instrumental-enrichment.aspx[/info]

Instrumental Enrichment (IE) is a cognitive intervention program that can be used both individually and in within the classroom. The IE program has been successfully used worldwide as a tool for the enhancement of learning potential and cognitive functioning of children and adults. For individuals with special needs, IE is used as a remidiation program; for higher functioning learners, IE is an enrichment tool. To date, the IE program has been successfully used in the following frameworks;

Enrichment programs for underachieving, regular and gifted children

Learning enahncement programs for immigrant and cultural minority students

Remedial programs for special needs children

Cognitive rehabilitation of brain injured individuals and psychiatric patients

Professional training and retraining programs in the industrial, military and business sectors

IE as a classroom curriculum is aimed at enhancing students' cognitive functions necessary for academic learning and achievement. The fundamental assumption of the program is that intelligence is dynamic and modifiable, not static or fixed. The IE program seeks to correct the deficiencies in fundamental thinking skills, provides students with the concepts, skills, strategies, operations and techniques necessary to function as independent learners, increase their motivation, develop metacognition - in short, to "learn how to learn."

IE materials are organized into 14 different instruments that comprise of paper and pencil tasks aimed at such specific cognitive domains as analytic perception, orientation in space and time, comparison, classification and more. Deliberately free of specific subject matter, the IE tasks are intended to be more readily transferable to all educational and everyday life situations. The IE materials and teacher manuals have received worldwide recognition and have been translated into 17 languages including all major European and some Asian languages. In addition, there is a Braille version of the IE tools for blind learners.